Construction Management and Economics, 1992, 10, 303-•320
Risk attitude and systematic bias in estimating and forecasting
STEPHEN MAK and JOHN RAF"VERY
School Qf Land arid Construction Management. Thames Polytechnic, Oakfield Lane. Dartförd, Kent DAI 2SZ,
l'his paper describes findings fronl the first phase oj•a research preject inL: estigating the modelling of risk and uncertainty in construction estimating and .fbrecasting. The objectives of the project are to examine current methods and, experimentally, to explore techniques which Qff&r the potentialfor the production of improved ifformation./i•oni estimates andforecasts. Some Q/the causes Qferror and bias in both traditional deterministic and in probabilistic estbnating andforecasting are described. The majority ofthe research in cognitive psychology which has led to the common assumption oferrors and biases has been carried out with lay people thinking intuitively about problems. The present research is an attempt to test these biases in a domain-spec@fic, non-intuitive context with indiuiduals trained in that domain. The authors hypothesize Ihat, ifprqfessional training has any value then they should find less evidence ofbias than is the case in the general literature. Empirical results are reported and discussed. This workfinds empirical support for only some of the biases commonly assumed to exist.
Risk, uncertainty, estimating, forecasting, heuristic, bias. fallacy.
Introduction
This paper describes findings from a research project investigating the modelling of risk and uncertainty in construction estimating and forecasting. The objectives of the project are to examine current methods and, experimentally, to explore techniques which offer the potential for the production of improved information from estimates and forecasts. Some causes of error and bias in both traditional deterministic and in probabilistic estimating and forecasting are described. The majority of the research in cognitive psychology which has led to the common assumption of errors and biases has been carried out with lay people thinking intuitively about problems. This research is an attempt to test these biases in a domainspecific context with individuals trained in that domain. The authors hypothesize that, if professional training has any value then they should find less evidence of bias than is the case in the general literature. Empirical results are reported from an experimental study of biases in construction estimating. This work finds empirical support for only some of the biases commonly assumed to exist. The implications of these results arc discussed.
Two further points need to be raised in this introduction. First, it should be noted that there is not a consensus in the literature on bias. The commonly held assumptions of
systematic 	anod bias whic; -i	a la rue bodv ol the literat ure ha 	.
ci"iücized t.i9. a ot hers ()hen 1 986) herc seeks to evidence of these biases u fairly realistic estiiiiaüng exc. Second. although the stildv d n , not about bidding. it is vi0ticiüÆ iTlUCh of the literaturc on takes as the existence of unbiascd bids (Flanag Iliid Norman _ 1 08 < Eznpi[ical st lid; WhiCjj gradually uncover thc of consl ion estimating bi•a.se'2 •nay result if, the ncc: . i-econsldcr some aspects of bidding
Ill. deline bias lil tertns ol- the bet th contract DF; cc forecast I l•.e lowest i hev have tlllce of bias: nartieky, ra differecc. pccc-eiita_p•.) d"-Terc- c r e variables and arc aifectcu such lactcn-s as the targ- contract, the used feedback, and the forecaster in
source of error and bias which s•tcrao the tendencv. in buildinø to make unrealisiic simplifying In other words, th " t ' to assuine a ': vav world uncertainly ari(' to asstllne 1 hal and tc»-ecasts acc and cc; -tam points. Let us benig by considering 1 hc:
Although su b.iects such as risk nlaysis and Ill iliiV theory ve bcc" . aught in busines schools fot iY,ore t h.dii a qua rtcr of a cent Oii\v be-corne embeQÄ.c in bi-lildiiig ili decade. -l" raditionallv. construcaon a: nu l)ropeii
developinent„ estr.natc.s and t'0i-ccr.sts of, for anac- costs. prices. rents and returns been given as sit; gle points. T tere are, sornetnnc,•,. verv this. Slil"le poiiit figures arc: often needed as •budgets [or puxnose.* of pla and So.-ac
•need to I-nana ue,u : hat thcv are exhibiti0ü. öülldlnps or sav a ha to faci}ilale SOiije: laree infrastructllre nro•c aced to be ir,at'üiged even to the extent redcsi2fii or reduceu such (hal thw K-; caual to or I than lh allowed ououet as thcr: • may bc possibility of LitCCS. 1B cases sine! ' estimates and forecasts ave indeed dav to day placaung control. Nevertheless. it rcvna; ns thc case that these sung_c arc forecasts and taB-zc,t not certaihö.ies. F or most purposes single t forecast< cronccal [iiOi"C there are fertile coilditio,n.'i for error ali e.siirnale: .foreca.st is by consultant and taen reported to a dn-ector, oartncr or other that said, two irnoortarii souq-c,es of Single cjoint forecasts OC exploreü the bias {hat rcsu! ts from on lh'-• hand. the need tor better forecasts and.
the laethod of 'in.", unagctial contrcjl 1.1.si1)2 pun Ishrncni.s for over- a ncl under-esGlTiation- Second, the bias ano mis-interprtL Oiii ihc difTc:
in oersona0 risk attitudes. These SOUfCCS of bids IQ'jng_ unoe„rstood in schools. Let us cx-piore thc,ii ti.lrn - The aporoach herc an to construct ion 01 work reported bv Woods ( 1966) in I "itc Busi"ess Reri('iv
in 	and 	305
Conflicting use QfJÖrecasts
In Inany organizations there arc reporting systems which involve managers reporting back, with explanations, when projects exceed budgets, or when returns fail to meet the initial target, by some arbitrary figure, in many cases 10 0 0. Where a project comes in under budget, or when returi"ls exceed forecasts, by more than the same amount the explanations, although necessary, arc not examined in quitc the same detail. There are not the same negative implications for the pcrsonncl who produced the model or the forecast. When an organization applies negative sanctions to managers who exceed budgets and. say, takes no action of praise or reward when projects come in on or under budget, then there will be a natural tendency to over-estimate forecasts of project costs and to under-estimate forecasts of project returns or rental. In this case, the figure which gets reported is not necessarily the most likely, it Inay be a very conservative figure, i.e. for project costs rather high, and for project returns a rather low figure which is quite likely to bc exceeded. In either case, this type of reporting will lead, over time, to a misallocation of resources. Many projects which have reasonablc likelihoods of achieving healthy returns will not get support as they do not contain a sufficient buffer to cnsurc* the safety of the forecaster in the short term. Many projects which have a better than even chance of coming in on or under budget will not get support because they cannot bc estimated safely enough to prolcct the forecaster from recrimination in the short term.t
Figures I and 2 illustrate, respectively. project cost and internal rate of return forecasts, showing in each casc the areas within which conservative and risk-seeking forecasts lie. A conservative and self-preserving estimate of project cost will lie in the upper range of possible outcomes. We may regard as risk-secking, any estimate from the lower end of the range with a probability of bcing exceeded of at least 0.5. Conversely, when we consider forecasts of project return, the conservative forecaster will draw a forecast from thc lower end of the range This is a very safe forecast. It will be rclativcly unlikely that the project will disappoint its sponsors by producing no or a very small return. ()ur choice of 0.5 as the cut-off point is purely arbilrarv and for the purposes of discussion. [n reality a client may choose a different cut-off dependent on it's own corporate risk attitude.
Dtff&rences in personal risk attitude
Biases and mis-interpretation occur even in situations where the output from a cost model is rcported in ways which purport to take account of risk exposure. A consultant may indicate that there is a 'good' chance that thc completed project in a spccific location will achieve a rent of, say, E 7() per square foot. Speaking ex ante, probably before the site has even bcen purchased, the consultant knows that the project will not be complete and available for at least two years. At which time the state of thc property market could be the samc, better or worse than today. Similarly, an advisor may state that there is a 'reasonable' chance that a project can be colnpletcd for less than €40 million. What do these statemcnts actually mean?
Assuming that there are a large nulnbcr of projects and that they are or similar size and profitability and that they generate similar levels of absolute profit. i.e. no one project exerts excessive influence on the firm or practice. Then it is suflicicnt for six in ten of the projects to come in on budget. However, if the forecaster is subject to the type of controls mcnfioned here then four •wrong' forecasts in ten may be a few too many for the forecaster's own carccr progression.
sk aititude the decision	!
tn 	and 	307
conservative forecast
low Internal Rate of Return (%) 	high
Risk attitude in forecast of return.
biased decisions. Even if the decision maker decides to adjust for the bias of the forecaster the nature of the adjustment is likely to be quite arbitrary and thus may also result in bias. Let us consider an example of what can happen in practice.
What the estimator said
Assume that an estimator is just completing work. on a bid for a large overseas project. The estimator has to report a net cost estimate to the managing director who will make the markup decision. The estimating team get together on the day before the bid is due to be submitted and decide that their best estimate of the net cost is $72 million. This figure includes tangible and intangible costs, head office overheads and an allowance for the cost of recovering
i ne 	rcccive.s Ill IS lien re togc: wit h 1 he backgrou 	bi
to the ger who is accustomed to taking calculated risks in fa voura ble ra t hc fi s that t he estilN1 le i s a forecast ol' (he o Ill i u cost should the firnn , I aroiect. "I'll us. for ..c L. pu rpos•es ol' ion rational 10 assunoe that th: estirnale ; . .s the likelv ligu rc frot[i distriblll whicli manifests sorne Akewaess t}iC u oner end of the ranuc. in estlmales of costs wr e expect a right skew„ otner 'Y'."d.s. if things go VCi'V well then the costs be at the lower enci o} the ranec. on the i f things go badlv tllty caii '0 verv badlv so that the dist is unlikely 10 be This is illus; rated in Y iu. 3 33 ooc: of the A)iect
„-.ind of tliC tnanagc: • is that desci"ibed by 	2. [he cha, actcrislics ol' this nu)del
p rt)lect co	I 	cxcrcns•e nyeeting the c.stinoatin	ea n-jS 	cds the end of the bid pci"i0QI 	thev 	a quite
Distic idea of the net cost of the projecl _ In a 2 In session it possib\e to carrv out a detailcd lat ion of the project o produce a h istoer•ciiTi 01 possiblc and. frorii ibis. a cumulat ive orotjabiht',' P.ra pli.
i lie sinu_llation resillts were obtained it was usual; y thal *elenninislic Sip ur.•• given had been ext rciiiCiY•' a oroba l)ihiy of exceedcd ofte; Thi.s not surprisine L-'i ven the long demon.slraiing Ihat business people n I y r! rkedlv risk averse. "I'hos- the purpose of discussion, using than dallilii. nnav construct o r ecnera.hz.ed estu-n; ltor thouuht but did T Ins is illustrated in 4 where wc - that the 87 2 Inillion is conservative estirnavc drawn a (listfiüülion h 10%'! . ver boutids of $5 0 $79 milli0ii
Project Cost ($ Millions)
Manager's perception of the single point estilnate.
Estimator's perception of project cost,
f ho amount of bais Introduced is illust raicc, oy CO)hbifiii-rg ; a  abstracted case hut it ilh»st rates well the for pcople imp.%citly adopt con>ervative roreca_sting as a i7,ethod of' cop; ag "16th manager: al control of profcssi01'ial T tic solutio€i to this problcrn is , obvious although possibly ilnpleii'ient orecaslers should adopt methods which "'i t,h bolli Fisk and nad Cisk a [tjiu(iC.
nøtic hieses
f herc is a large ych010Eical litch 	t lic subiect olliudgelüenial bias ; jncl Inconsistency .
I-his has L'ec; -•, widelv  the il ield of const rucl i0ii economics rna riåuemcnt (see for
Skitinore et al.. Birnie Y a Les 1 7 1 73 ). Those here. 9'•or a rec.-Ik deta il . v.erred {o Evans ( 1 9 0 0 1 Here we onlv include sutlicient e .'„aterial to place 01)r study, reported in its propej- context.
The work of Daniel versky and Kahüenvan ( I versky and Kahnc,mafJ. 1974) has had a aug.c in ii'ianv of work inc\udine and
-i science to namc but three. Their w 	has lead to varic,l-lR cont rovers; cs ano inerc IS so; ne 	fron'i iheir tindinus (Coht: x	of on three cosnmon l"illc.s or thumb used 	peoplc ; naking 	1 nc: qe , arc known os: a fid 	and adjust I-nerii .
three leads to. so called. fallacies. 	us. bricnv. c	turn The
heuristic is the process of evaluating the probability of an uncertain event, or a sample, by the degree to which it (i) is similar in essential properties to its parent population; and (ii) reflects the salient features of the process by which it is generated. It is in essence an assessment of thc degree of correspondence between a sample and a population. an instance and a category, an act and an actor or, more generally, between an outcome and a model (Tversky and Kahneman, ] 983). Since information is commonly stored and processed in relation to mental models, such as prototypes and schemata, it is natural and economical for the probability of an event to be evaluated by the degree to which that event is representative of an appropriate mental model (Smith and Medin, 1981). The reprcsenta_tiveness heuristic leads to fallacies about base rates and sample size.
Availability is a heuristic which makes use of retrievability of instances. Some event with which one has has personal contact looms more likely than it would statistically. For example, if one of us has had personal contact with an airplane accident, a relatively rare event, thcn we are highly likely to overestimate the likeiihood of future similar mishaps.
Adjustment refers to the cases when people make estimates by starting from an initial value and adjusting it to yield the final answer. Adjustment froln an anchor is usually employed in numerical prediction when a relevant value is available. The initial valuc may be suggested by the formulation of the problem, or it may be the rcsult of a partial computation. Adjustments are typically insufficient in both cases. Anchoring refers to the phenomenon where final results are usually biased toward the initial values. Anchoring occurs not only when the starting point is given, but also when the assessor has to base his estimate on the result of incomplete computation.
It is known that people use heuristics (rule of thumb) in decision making. This seems sensible. It has been shown - although not without dissent - that these heuristics may lead to 'systematic and predictable' errors (Tversky and Kahnemam 1974: 1 131). l'his project is concerned with empirically testing for the extent of these biases in a specific domain with domain specific experts who are, in the main, thinking non-intuitively.* This has been done before in other fields such as investment analysis (Slovic, 1972). As Birnie and Yates (1991 • 171 ) put it recently in this journaL 'it is unlikely that construction estimators and forecasters are immune from these tendencies'. On the other hand, we may hypothesize that ifcstimating skill, training and expert judgement are worth anything then this may imply a pattern of bias diflérent to the gencral population. This question is the subject of thc experiment reported in the next section.
An experimental study of systematic bias in construction estimating
A study was carried out in April 1991 with a group of 62 final year undergraduate quantity surveying students at Thames Polytechnic. Many of them had reported several years'
* These questions were explored by Skitmore et al. ( 1 990) in an empirical study of construction estimating accuracy. [n this case, though, the questions on this type of bias tended to be outside the field of conslruction. Therefore, Skitmore et al.'s study, while constituting a useful testing of'Vversky and Kahneman's findings, did not extcnd into the non-intuitive, domain specific field of the work being reported here.
the construction a sct of es! lrnaanu tasks in lhe 	e,} u
32 subiccts in the contro! roup nd in thc group. 1 ncv g; vcn I wcck_ to COiTiP,CtC the tasks and not told i veere in. P' used to analvse the data.
tons in the que (hi}v Section three oucstions (estinu the three (represea; ail , a lid a aiid adil.l,slmcnt) which iti t ICC various fallacies. I he caestions a rc designc(. construction context and involve the ! ask of e.sl h sc! contained ail enpendik v.x; racts ol' cost tion ; rono sources sutlicienj% for all Questions to bc answerc•' thc ouesifi0iis given to IliC erouns a ues t,ion while t ex peränctiital grot-ID was given the same question plus an piece of th{-• '„•'hick-i is to test whe.l hc; the subjects can distinguish octwc.c r• relevant a nd in-uevaA1t I orocess 'syrs•qenaa t_.,.• a nd predict a ble' errors (Tversky K 'dhneman. . [ i'iC three questions .1Stce italics are additional infornvation given thc cxr; erli-ncntal Ui'C)U D of suhiecls. Cablc 3 show the raw data collected from thc subiccth. Coiunnn.s 2. 4 a Pd 6 are Ihc given bv coll_lrnns 3, and 7 shov: ' ve subject actilailv adoptc,'d the heu rl.stic concerned. Since there arc _3() subiccts in thc
control group have a 'n .a _ ienoa rk in
,4naly.sis o/ results
i'he first 	is 	a
two 	(Group	the control
Group B. 1 he
Ihc cost of a finish T nis ex t n was cleqip.ne'& st.lbjectG anchored to this cost lhcn an answer bu: l.sca tosvards that cost (thc . enect that a prcjless'enal knowledpc o. this particular fic! d (in this a or ) the ge.' poplilaii0i1 to display an anchc,fiiüg e of the csiiiiiåir,d costs or thc statistic is 10 compare lhc Glüercnce the two there a; no dif-lercnce between the est; matcs of the urotlps. And the alternative „vpot hesiS is that thei-e is a difTercnct estinvale.cl cost bet vv: eca t rcgu.ts lii 6 showr s thal With a degrec: of o' the ol' the pooled variance estilliåte is I .96. valuc i that corresponding to a t-valuc at the kcvcl. This means that thc null IS not reicctcd at significavce level. In turn this 'ITI€ans thCDQ no statisticallv significant differcncc 00<1 s bet wet-a the gfC,i.lPS. The which says 'the client has hcaru i-eports thal a recently finished supermarket cost E! Tiiil.i01f, did not have much on the su b.jccts• cost estitnaie. Ptad il not becn the case. thcn the c.xpcrimental grenn-s cost estinnatc Iou.•r er, it) this iii order to fit thc o! ' iniiiion.
L A client approaches you and wants to build a new supernvarket in Dartford Town Centre. Prepare an estimate for the construction costs for this proposed supermarket, with a gross floor area 10 100 parking spaces and associated works.
The client has heard reports that a recently finished supermarket /br one of his cost, -5 nüllion.
You arc an estimator employed by ACME Contractors Ltd. You are asked to prepare a lump sum estimate for the pile caps as shown in Fig. l. This estimate is used 10 compare thc tender submissions of several sub-contractors. V his pile of cap is to be let as a separate subcontract (0 one of the snb-contractors,
You have checked a prerions B() your company and mund the /bllowin(/ infirmation:
(2) Ili$/h tensile rein/brcemenl bars cut, henr and bundled 16-32 mm diameter	E350
(3) Formwork to foundation and beds heighl >	{20.00/1112
bearing in mind that, due to your company's pricing policy, these rates are not necessarily true costs Q/ the respectice itents.
A client approaches you and wants you to give an approximate estimate (total cost based on cost/m 2 ) for the construction of a factory building for his new light-weight production line. The area of the (actory will be about 12 000 in 2 , located in rural West Yorkshire.
The construclion will be steel columns. steel truss roe/' with aluminium rod coverings: pad fbundations and aluminium cladding. The soil type is mainly clay. Some landscaping work will also be required but that is to be considered as a separate contract later. There will need to be builders work allowances for 2441 security guard post and CCTV installation. The installations themselves need not he considered at this stage.
A separate set of information sheets, comprising extracts from BCIS, Wessex Data Bank and Spon's Price Book, were provided to the subjects_
Nonetheless, the mean cost eslimate OIV the experimental group did show a lower figure compared to that of the control group% 116 ()49 867 vs E 7 710 844 (  To an extent this rcllects [hat the subjects in the experimental group exterted more caution in thc estimate and tended 10 sclect a relatively lower figure, whenever there was a range of figures to choose from, so that the estimate produced did nol deviate L too much' from the clients' information.
A qualitative analysis of the questionnaires was underlaken. The calculations in cach of the cxpcwimenlal group's questionnaire were analyr sed 10 see if the anchor was really used by the subjects in arriving at the final cost estimate- A yes no count was done and [his is shown below in Fig. 7.
Figi.li-c 7 shows that all the 30 subjects in the experimental group did not use the anchor in their calculations. Indeed, in scrutinizing the calculations, some subjects (5 out of 3() of 16.7%) did comment on the anchor being ofno use for them ill mak ing [he estimate. Subjects mentioned {he absence of information on location, size and lime factors.
The second question is about availability_ Similarly- group A gets the plain question while: group B gets and extra piece or information which was so designed that it
Z 2 test of the use of anchor in calculations for the experimental group.
Expected Res
should be discarded. The appendix provided with the questionnaire gave an easy access to cost information which should have been adopted by thc subjects had they relied only on available information without resorting either to their own expert knowledge or to up-todate data banks. The null hypothesis here is that the cost estimates done by both groups are not different.. The alternative hypothesis is that the cost estimates are different between thc two groups. The output is shown in Fig. 8.
t-test for:
t Degrees of 2-Teil Val ue 	Pr±.
EstiNted Cost (E' 000)
Fig. 8. t-tcst of the availability effect in cost estimate between the two groups.
The calculated t-value is 0.46 with 60 degrecs of freedom. This value is much smaller than the t-value at the 5% level and therefore renders the null hypothesis not to be rejected. This implies that there is no statistically significant differencc in the cost estimates between the two groups and infers that the available information did not have great effect on the cost cstimate process or the subjects.
A yes--no count similar to question I above was also done. Those subjects in the experimental group who used the available information were counted and the results, togcther with a 7 2 test is displayed in Fig. 9.
The Z 2 test result does not show a significant differencc within the experimental group between those who uscd the 'available' information and those who did not. This has implications for the results of the I-test because it could be implied later that the majority of the subjects within the experimental group did not use the available information. In fact, 20
out of 3() (66. ) of the for this cotil.d
bank. lhe q Licsllonnillrc stale,"• . extract"d l'rorn the data book and the rates for reinforcct, p.. J d VAvavation .
a nd concrete, all as described in thc pi-enl IT) ble itc: i'ti	hic h 	also 	to thc
However, su bicc: s ,'åssllinec, the rate for ono I he la ha nk covered concrete orn a„• anu ror reinfovec: nelll, n VI-k and excavation iijrormation providcd. A	l'roin the infovma tion without 10 thc data pi-cns; idcd •a inforynauon proviucd inore intoniiauon lhal
The aggregate effect of the sue,jects 	the exp	-cal urokl(, snows a
estitnaie that lhnl d0i-,e bv the eontrol ','.'CfC delibera the has not becn she, '5 t lie skevved far from mcaii. perhaps thie two groups signiljcant (iliiere.ä've in the ! -statistic. (_)ii too sk e nn•; . [rom the ilican, th b )jects would have noticed the it. [his c, Kect is in Inuch hi2hcr standard deviation in Il
ble• inlornlation been have proa
rd quest inn IS a 	t •a t I veness. 	b 	SOi-jße extra descfip,jons 	arc to lest whether t\ac subiecis 	bc ,	of infor; and adi\lsl_ I I%I ratc inforiT)a1ion accordinulv. It would not bc aiiected	the de.scnpi ion of the PCC,iCC	i t is so 	a iiu typical: othei-wise thcv would have cornmitled the base rate
the csinnale.d between the t-,vo groups the I. Sin-lila rlv, die I-still istic is
I-value for tF.c pooled vnriaiice estunale IS Illuch largc; • that supported and thcrc is evidc:

K. hypothesis is 	l.hc
a re 	I t is al.SC' interest :


I-test of thc representativeness efléct in cost estimate between the two groups.
to note that the mean and standard deviation of the cost estimate by the experiment group is much smaller that that by the control group, the group which did not receive the representative' information. This means the subjects of the experimental group consistently estimated a lower cost that the subjects of the control group. "l*his can be explained, though, by thc fact that the subjects of the experimental group confined themselves to two sets of data from the data bank provided, in addition to the 'representative' information, which are the BCIS Average Building Price for Steel Frame Factories and Factories over 2000 rn 2 Gross Floor Area. Also these two sets of data had the lowest mean values among the six sets of BCIS data provided. Obviously, the control group, having no indication of the typc of construction and so on, tended to have a wilder choice.
t-test for:
iveness) Esti•ted Cost (E' 000)
A yes--no count was again done in an attempt to distinguish whether the subjects actually used or did not use the representative infOrmation. The statistics are shown in Fig. 1 1.
USE REPRESENTATIVE
X 2 test of the use of representativeness information in calculations for the experimental group.
Twenty-onc out of 30 subjects (70%) in the experimental group did not use thc representative information provided in their estimates. This is significant as shown by the Z2 value of 4.8 which is smaller than a Z 2 value at the 5 0 level with 1 degree of freedom. The hypothesis that there is no difference between the adoption of representativeness information is not supported. This means that the subjects did not randomly adopt the representativeness
information. eiiect. thc nnaaorltv Oi d 10 -ween high and low quaiitv data. As we are not of estimates It p,ausibkc f, test results aq -c . '.hc hellfisacq suggested be and Kahn•cman (1974)„ have used. In this CåSC. thev not used the subjects w; tliiii the experiii'iental grour,.
Cenclusieas and limitations
In a doman•, soecific. context scn.siiiv-c the domain tend not to making intuitive to find Sill) 00 it systematic commonlv to aiiiiCt estimators.
demons "Lc that in this situnlion. subjects tended e In judgemcnts than filig.ht have ocen cxpc•cted from the bias shcillld
, Oi course. thc light of the of the which are discuss" f he comparison of the cost estir,iålcs of thc t wo Ei-onps of subi•c, t. dc,v.i „ot reflect clearly whcther thc sub, the or not. A supp.e.. approach, which looks into how the subjects actually did the calculations and evall.lfdtcs hether thev heuristics. provides furthcT i 10,. Iri general. no statistically significant support was found for I re,r o of the thf•zc biases. analysis e! the data showed that mauv subjccts out of 30 in lhe experimental group) did acti.lally• fiiakc. ; '_-,ut incorrcä, data supplied with 2. Tnis. it could bc acgucd that the s•uhicct: demolisirate thc availability bias. However. the tendency to use availah! c data did not procjuce statistically significant differences the resi]lts of either could bc argued thal th') absence of a significant is bcc: 'Erse the rogue not •incorrect enough, i.e. it was too close urathcnvdtic: ally, to ihc pricc c in the data bank. f his raises a gcncral tnethodological problem in emprüica! in this field. Since the subjects have expertise the donnahAl they are likely to notice if although available. is inccn-rect. In tius cak tbcv veould not In our study, perhaps, the was used because it , sufficientlv close to reality not to be noticed as obviously incorrect.
li',tüiaveny, to thc conclusion that pccis shoulu not derniiii,sl ra a generalized lendency to aoopt availabilitv A ".vistic. Ta ble 4 the this study. Sever,. 'Q [qctors , mav have coniriuntca these tindi'\ lt•si. {he analvsi.s ol' the
questions was not. COfilincu •purely to comparison o, the given an+,vef.s. Olson of given answers a• ,-omparison of the used tn arrive at the ansuvers otii.
This. to an cxtent. has the danger 0k othc c.• considerations. such as addir12 differcr,! percentages of professiona l Pees or odd itcrns W'hich. though correct. aflect {lhc in the calculations. and lend firmer suppo Secondly, the questions

set in an appropriate context so that the subjects were familiar with what was asked or expected. Thirdly, the su bjects were not asked to complete the questionnaire in a laboratory environment in which they had to complete the questionnaire in a hurry. They were allowed to take the questionnaire home though it was suggested that they should not spend more than I h to finish it. Although this may introduce the danger ofcollaborative work, in general the outcome appears satisfactory insofar as we have no evidence to suggest collusion.
There are sevcral limitations to this study. For example, small number of subjects and subjects not being highly experienced in the construction industry. Nevertheless, the results lend support to the authors' hypothesis that if professional training has any value then they should find less evidence of bias than is thc case in the general literature. In the work reported here, subjects with some experience. but educated to degrce level, did demonstrate that conclusions of previous findings by cognitive psychologists may have been too pessimistic.
The study has not considered the extent to which the 'extra' information, given to the experimental group, affected subjects' judgements. The skewncss of the 'extra' information given to the subjects may affect subjects' choice of approach. If the extra piece of information is skewed far enough, perhaps the adoption of a heuristic would be apparent. However, one should not overlook thc counter balancing effect, i.e. if the given information is too skewed, the subjects would be able to spot it and discard it in the calculations. It would be worthwhile investigating this effect in further studies.
•rhis study may be seen as less important for the results than for raising questions about the methodology of this area of research. Much of the empirical work on heuristics and biases, on decision making under risk, and the study of risk attitudes through the construction of personal utility curves had been done through the use of laboratory experiments. Amongst the advantages of this laboratory approach are, detailed control by the investigators and the ability to isolate specific variables of interest. Frequently, their advantage is also their weakness. The results are often criticized due to the unrealistic nature of the experiments themselves. They may involve hypothetical outcomes or tiny rcwards. The conditions of making judgements may be very dissimilar to the real world equivalent. The work reported here did not take place in a laboratory setting. The subjccts had no knowledge of the literature on biases, they did have some training in the professional area of the estimating tasks involved. They were asked to bring their considered responses back within wcek. This is probably a slightly longer timescale than would be the case in industry but it is certainly more like the real world that the laboratory equivalent.
However, in attempting to resolve one problem which besets most laboratory experiments in this field we may have introduced other problems We have carried out a study which is more akin to the real world than its laboratory equivalent. We cannot prove that consultation or collusion did not take place. Although, on the other hand, we have no evidence to suggest that they did. Let us, momentarily, assume the worst. What would be the effect on the results of this study if the subjects had colluded in some way. ? A priori it would seem sensible to expect some sort of Delphi type consensual effect. This would have an ameliorating effect on the results and would lessen the effect of any bias which might otherwise have shown up. Hence if this study shows only weak evidence of bias it would be safe to assumc that there would be even stronger evidence in a laboratory study. Conversely, the methodology of this study would tend to suggest that it is highly unlikely that we have found evidence of a bias which was not there.
Perhaps the best that can be said is that there was little significant support for the existence of 'severe and systematic' bias in this study. Thus, the authors' hypothesis remains, for the
Copyright 	Ri hts
Risk altitude and systematic bias estimating 	fbrecasling
Copyright 0 2001 All Ri hts Reseved.
Co ri ht 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.
Co ri ht 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.
Risk attitude and systematic bias in estimating and fbrecasting
Copyright 0 2001 . All Ri hts Reseved.
Copyright 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.
Copyright 0 2001 . All Ri hts Reseved.
Risk altitude and systematic bias in 	and /brecasting	313
Copyright 0 2001 . All Ri hts Reseved.
Co ri ht 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.
Risk attitude and systematic bias in estimating and .fbrecasting	31 1
Co ri ht 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.
Risk attitude and systematic bias in estimating and .fbrecasting	31 1
All 	Reseved.
Co ri ht 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.
Risk attitude and systematic bias in estimating and .fbrecasting	31 1
All 	Reseved.
Co ri ht 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.
All Ri hts Reseved.
