On the allocation of risk in construction projects
S C Ward, C B Chapman and B Curtis
The willingness of contracting parties to take on risks is an important consideration in the allocation of project risks. A number of factors contribute to willingness to bear risks, but not all motivate conscientious, effective project risk management. A party's willingness to take on risk is reflected in the premium that he or she is able to charge for doing so. However, contractors face a number of difficulties in being able to price risk properly. The regarding of contractors as quasiinsurers suggests pricing rules that are analogous to insurance practice, and important complications associated with adverse selection and moral hazard.
It is well known that project uncertainty and the allocation of associated risks to contracting parties have a substantial impact on project performance. This recognition has led several writers to argue for the systematic identification and assessment of all sources of risk for all projects 1 2 . The identification of risks as early as possible in a project's life is important, not only to enable project constraints and appropriate cost estimates to be determined, but also to focus projectmanagement attention on ways of controlling and allocating risk2
In a construction context, risk analysis should be undertaken by the client to reduce uncertainty and risk, pursue efficiency, and check the risk/expected-cost balance. In addition, risk analysis should be used to determine how risks should be allocated to contracting parties. An analysis of risk should strongly influence the choice of method of payment and form of contract. Successful, appropriate allocation of risk presupposes
Department of Accounting and Management Science, University of
Southampton, Southampton S09 5NH, UK
an atmosphere of trust between contracting parties, and a clear, mutual appreciation of all relevant project risks and their effects. Subsequent risk analysis by other parties, including the management contractor, is appropriate, and the sharing of information about risks between parties is highly desirable .
High-quality project risk management requires the following preconditions:
full specification of the project, and all associated
a clear perception of the risks being borne by each party ,  sufficient capability, competence and experience to manage the risks,  motivation to manage the risks, which requires a clear linkage between a party's management of risks and the party's receipt of reward.
In short, the quality of project risk management is improved if risks are identified and evaluated in a systematic way, risks are allocated to the parties best able to control them, and parties who are expected to bear risk receive adequate reward for doing so.
This paper examines these ideas in more detail. First, some preliminary ideas about risk allocation that have general support are set out. Next, the implications of project risk allocation and the concept of willingness to take on risk are examined. A contractor's willingness to bear risk is considered, and related to the contractor's opportunity and ability to price for the project risks that he/she is expected to bear.
Max Abrahamson has suggested that it is proper for a contracting party to bear risk in any one of the following five cases 4..
e if the risk is of loss due to his/her own wilful misconduct or lack of reasonable efficiency or care, o if he can cover a risk by insurance and allow for the premium in settling his charges, and it is most convenient and practicable for the risk to be dealt with in this way, o if the preponderant economic benefit of running the risk accrues to him,  if it is in the interests of efficiency to place the risk on him,  if, when the risk eventuates, the loss happens to fall on him in the first instance, and there is no reason under any of the above headings to transfer the loss to another, or it is impracticable to do so.
These guidelines are a useful first step in addressing the problem of risk allocation, and they have received widespread support, but they do not provide a complete solution.
The first guideline deals with risks associated with unreasonable behaviour. The allocation of such uncertainties in the manner indicated must be uncontentious, but it is important for each party to recognize and deal with such risk as it relates to another party.
The second guideline deals with that set of project risks that can be externalized from the contractual parties. Insofar as the client ultimately pays the insurance fee, the issue of the allocation of insurable risks is only a question of who can obtain the cheapest cover. In an efficient insurance market, both parties are able to obtain cover at the same price, but, in practice, market inefficiencies may be important.
The third guideline recognizes that economic benefits and risks ought to be matched, but it does not provide guidelines as to how this should be done, or deal with the need for an adequate level of reward for taking on a particular risk, or differences in such rewards depending on willingness to take risk, which may be unrelated to the ability to take risk.
The fourth guideline recognizes the importance of efficiency, but there is some ambiguity about the nature of this: efficiency with respect to which contractual party, and with what objectives? Presumably, this guideline represents the widely accepted notion that 'risk should be allocated to the party best able to anticipate and control that risk 'S , but this may not be the party best able to bear it.
Taken together, the third and fourth guidelines suggest a fixed-price agreement for contractor-controllable risks, and a cost-reimbursable agreement for client-controllable risks, such as changes to designs. However, this is a naive interpretation, because it ignores the pricing of risks, and the differing attitudes to risk of the contractual parties. In addition, these guidelines offer little help in allocating risks that are uncontrollable, or controllable to a degree by more than one contractual party. The possibility of risk sharing is ignored.
The fifth guideline is a useful catchall, but does not resolve any of the difficulties noted above.
As Abrahamson has acknowledged4 .
One of the problems of the construction industry is that although decisions have to be made about allocating risks, in negotiating contracts and revising standard contract forms very little consideration has been given to basic principles, and what one might call a philosophy of risk is lacking.
Successful, appropriate allocation of risk along the lines proposed by Abrahamson presupposes an atmosphere of trust between contracting parties, and a clear, mutual appreciation of all relevant project risks and their effects. In the absence of one or both of these conditions, and given the limitations of these guidelines, it is perhaps not surprising that the debate about appropriate allocation of risks is often diverted to the investigation and clarification of the effectiveness of allocation mechanisms such as contract clauses 5.
The willingness of parties to take on risks is an important consideration in the allocation of project risks. Contractual allocation of project risks is essentially in the hands of the client. If the client is unwilling to bear a particular source of risk, he/she can pass this on to one or more of the other parties involved in the project, including the management contractor in a management contract if he so wishes. Of course, the client will pay a price for passing on this risk, although clients do not always fully appreciate the premium that they pay for this. Where a professional or contractor is aware that he/she will be required to bear a given type of risk, professional fees and tender prices will include an additional premium to reflect the expected cost of this risk, plus a contingency sum in most cases, plus a fee for the risk-bearing service. To the extent that a professional or contractor is unwilling to bear the given risk, a further increase in the premiums will be sought. The client may be unaware of the size of these premiums that are incorporated in prices tendered, although they may vary from contractor to contractor and represent a significant portion of the
The client may also incur a further, additional cost via an impact on the project objectives of professionals' and contractors' behaviour over the life of the project. For example, quality may suffer, delays occur, or claims may arise that increase problems and potentially add to the project's cost.
Professionals or contractors who bear project risk have four basic response options:
pass the risk on to a third party,  continue to bear the risk, and manage it for profit, but accept liabilities,  if a downside risk eventuates, try to recover costs from other parties, including the client,  if a downside risk eventuates, meet liabilities reluctantly, walk away from the contract, or go bankrupt.
The bearers of a risk will be motivated to use the first option, provided that this is cost-effective, irrespective of whether they bear the risk willingly or not, provided that they are sufficiently aware of these risks. Bearers of risk will generally be motivated to use the second option to the best of their ability. Arguably, to the extent that a contractor is an unwilling bearer of risk, the third and fourth options are more likely. In one major contractor's experience, if a contractor does take a risk that is realized, he will fight to get his money back any way he can .
If a professional or contractor is unaware that he or she bears a given type of risk, the third and fourth options are the only options, by default. The first option is a particularly undesirable strategy if the third party is unaware of what is happening, or is unwilling (but perhaps obliged) to bear the given risk, because the fourth option may be induced. In general, it ought to be in the interests of all parties to a project to ensure that the second option, the management of risk, occurs as far as is possible.
WILLINGNESS OF PARTIES TO TAKE ON
The willingness of a contracting party to bear risk is dependent on the factors listed below:
general attitude to risk,  perception of project risk,  ability to bear the consequences of a risk eventuating, e ability to manage the associated uncertainty and thereby mitigate the risk, o need to obtain work,  perception of the risk/return tradeoffs of transferring the risk to another party.
General attitude to risk, the first factor, refers to a party's preference for different risk/return tradeoffs. One party may require a higher expected rate of return for taking on a given level of risk than another party. One organization may prefer low-risk, low-expectedreturn opportunities, while another may prefer highrisk, high-expected-return opportunities.
The perception of project risk, the second factor, is important. Obviously, a certain level of awareness of a given type of risk must be present if the issue of willingness or unwillingness arises. The point here is that perceptions may be incomplete, inaccurate, optimistic or pessimistic. In a cooperative project environment, perceptions should be based on the appropriate analysis of project uncertainty, and a clear understanding of the consequential risks to each party. If a risk is taken on with an inadequate understanding of that risk, then willingness to bear, manage and realize risk (the second response option) may turn to unwillingness and the third and fourth response options in due course. Clients who lack experience of the construction industry and building may be unwilling to take on any risk in the absence of any information about risks.
The ability to bear the consequences of a risk eventuating (the third factor) relates to the effect on the party's ability to meet the liability and continue in business. For example, a large organization involved in many projects may be able to diversify specific project risks away, and so accept them readily. However, it is also important to appreciate that some contractors, at some time, may take the view that, if they do not take the risk associated with low bids, they will certainly go out of business, and so believe that it is better for them willingly to take risks that, if realized, might put them out of business. The large organization that can distribute specific project risks has a real ability to take risks, while the contractor who is prepared to go bankrupt if a risk eventuates has a false ability to take risks. This issue is separate from that considered in relation to the first factor above, which implicitly assumes that all risks realized will be met.
A party will be more willing, all other things being equal, to bear risk if he/she feels able to manage the associated uncertainty, and thereby mitigate the risk (the fourth factor). Parties skilled in risk management ought to be comparatively more willing to bear risk. An important caveat is that the risk must be one that can be controlled by that party. A concern in developing an appreciation of project risks will be the extent to which the risks are controllable. Unwillingness to bear a given project risk might be due primarily to a perceived inability to control the given risk.
A party's need to obtain work (the fifth factor) will affect his/her willingness to take on risk directly. Competitive forces, or prestigious projects, may induce professionals and contractors not only to trim prices and risk premiums, but also to take on risks that they would otherwise prefer to avoid. Thus, one management contractor accepted a prestigious contract based on the Royal Institute of British Architects 1963 Prime Cost form of contract in which the management contractor remained wholly responsible for the working contractors. Although the company would have preferred a UK Joint Contracts Tribunal 1987 standard JCT 87 form of management contract, it took responsibility for the working contractors at a fee of 2%, with fixed preliminaries. Work was short at the time, and the project was seen as a prestige contract that would enable the company to develop its management contracting capability
With respect to the sixth factor, a party may be willing to bear a risk in the first instance because the estimated costs of transferring the risk on to another party are lower than the premium earned for taking the risk from the client. For example, a management contractor may be prepared to accept liability for exceeding a 'guaranteed maximum cost', because the risk can be passed on to works contractors via suitable contractual terms6 . Works contractors may fail to appreciate the significance of these terms, and therefore fail to price for them, or competitive forces may oblige them not to add a premium to their bids for taking on this risk.
Alternatively, a party, particularly the client, may be willing to bear a risk because the perceived costs of transferring it to another party are considered to be too high. Professionals, contractors or insurers may require what the client considers to be excessive premiums, and so the client will retain the risk himself.
The willingness to bear risk is appropriate (in that it leads to conscientious management of risk) only insofar as it is based on a general attitude to risk (the first factor), an adequate perception of project risk (the second factor), a real ability to bear the consequences of a risk eventuating (the third factor), and a real ability to manage the associated uncertainty (the fourth factor). Willingness to bear risk may be inappropriate when it is due to inadequate perception of project risk, a false ability to bear the consequences of a risk eventuating, a need to obtain work (the fifth factor), and a false perception of the risk/return tradeoffs of transferring the risks to another party (the sixth factor).
CLIENT WILLINGNESS TO RETAIN RISK
Client organizations are often quite unwilling to carry project risk. Moreover, clients have become increasingly influenced by their lawyers in determining the allocation of risk in construction contracts. Not surprisingly, lawyers advise their clients to obtain protection under their contracts for construction works6 . Many clients still want the feeling of being safeguarded from having to carry risks, even with a management contract. Inexperienced clients are often advised by lawyers who do not generally understand the principles underlying management contracting, and they draft contracts that place some or all of the liability for cost and time overruns on the management contractor. For example, one management contractor received an invitation to tender for a contract using JCT 87 conditions, but with special clauses appended that assigned responsibility for the performance of works contractors to the management contractor6 . This blatant inconsistency might have slipped through had not all the documentation been carefully checked. In any dispute, the special clauses would have taken precedence over the general clauses in English law. The contractor proposed to seek removal of the clause, or, failing that, to set a higher fee, or to withdraw. Experienced management contracting organizations avoid such contracts, but others bid keenly for them, and then get into difficulties. This has led to disillusionment with management contracting in some quarters.
Clients may be more willing to take on risk if they have experience of the construction industry and build frequently. For example, management contractors often ask works contractors to state separately what their bonding costs will be, so that the client can decide whether he/she should take the liquidity risk. Experienced clients weigh this decision up for each working contractor, whereas one-off clients normally expect full bonding to be provided6 . Of course, it may be argued that there is no reason why a client should carry project risks if she/she does not wish to do so, provided that he is willing to pay for the privilege.
CONTRACTOR WILLINGNESS TO TAKE ON
The willingness of a professional, contractor or insurer to bear a risk, as based on the factors discussed above, is generally influenced by the premium that they are able to charge for doing so. Inability to charge a sufficiently high premium, owing to market forces, for example, may render a professional or contractor less willing to bear a given risk, and encourage the first, third and fourth risk response options, if they are obliged to bear a risk in the first instance. Consequently, as with any fixed-price contract with associated uncertainty, it does not necessarily follow that the party tendering the lowest premium is the party who should bear the risk.
As the managing director of a major contracting firm remarked, it is normal for the client to want a contractor to carry project risk, and, if the contractor is able to evaluate and price the risks, he/she may be happy to carry them. 6 . However, a contractor is often not able properly to evaluate and price risks. Even if the contractor is prepared to undertake appropriate analysis of project risks, lack of information about project uncertainties, and lack of time to prepare the tender, may preclude the proper evaluation of project risks6 . Once the appraisal stage has been completed, and the design has advanced sufficiently for contractors to be invited to tender for the construction work, which can include the completion of major elements of design, a great sense of urgency normally becomes apparent. A project that may have taken several years to justify and prepare is parcelled up and handed to tendering contractors who are given just a few weeks to evaluate it from scratch and commit themselves to a price for building it. The tenderers may have been through an extensive and expensive prequalification exercise that is designed to determine their capacity to undertake the work. Having experienced the gratification of being considered acceptable, they would like to be allowed the time to study the tender documents in detail, and to consider carefully their approach to the work. Instead, they are normally faced with a tendersubmission deadline that only permits a scanty appraisal of the complex construction problems and risks that are often involved. The following scenario is typical.
A site-assessment team, which may include a project manager, estimator, planner, geologist and representatives of specialist subcontractors, is assembled and despatched to the site with instructions to gather in all the method- and cost-related information needed for preparing the bid. This information, together with quotations from materials suppliers, subcontractors and plant companies, and advice on the legal, insurance, financial and taxation implications, is assessed by the estimating team working under great pressure to meet the deadline. Various construction techniques often have to be investigated and compared, and temporary works proposals considered and designed. Lack of information on ground conditions, plant availability, materials supply, subcontractor capacity and many other important factors has to be overcome by further investigation and inspired guesswork. The contractual terms have to be explored to elicit the imposed risk strategy of the client. An assessment has to be made of the client's reaction to any qualifications in the bid. Possible claims opportunities must be evaluated.
In the absence of adequate time and information, any evaluation and pricing of potential risk exposure is likely to be on an ad hoc basis. A typical approach begins with the evaluation of risks by the questioning of experienced managers in the contractor's organization, and arrival at a consensus of the 'gut feelings' expressed. Working contractors attempt to assess their level of risk by looking at the overall programme, checking to see if it is very 'tight', considering the effects of delays by suppliers, and checking the basics for any extension of time. Few, if any, calculations or references to specific results on previous contracts are made, the rationale being that any such references are unlikely to be applicable to the circumstances of the contract in question, even if any relevant data exists. The chairman of the tendering organization ends up by 'pulling a figure out of the air' that is based on his/her feelings about the advice obtained.
Only special works contractors are likely to be in a position to price for a risk and negotiate for it to be identified explicitly. An alternative view is that 'contractors worthy of the name have the experience and capability to evaluate most risks with a sufficient degree of certainty on a broad approach, rather as insurers are able to evaluate insurable risks' 7 .
Regarding contractors as quasiinsurers suggests pricing rules analogous to insurance law and practice. For example,
• If a contractor is to bear a risk, that risk ought to be identified, and the contractor given an opportunity to price it.
• All relevant information available to the client ought to be supplied to the contractor prior to contract, and ought not to be withheld.
• The basis of pricing should be on broad categories of risk, rather than related to small details.
• A contractor should not be expected to price risks that cannot be quantified with sufficient certainty, given the limited profit margins involved.
The first rule argues for the explicit identification of risks, at least by the contractor, and adequate time for a contractor to price these risks. Joint identification of risks by client and tendering contractors is desirable on efficiency grounds and to ensure that both parties are fully aware of the risks involved. If tendering contractors were simply given more time to tender without client involvement, they might or might not undertake adequate analysis of project risks. Clients ought to require tenders that clearly indicate the risk premiums associated with the major project risks. It is clearly more efficient for the client to undertake some aspects of the analysis of project risk, for example an analysis of ground conditions, to expedite the tendering process and to ensure all tenderers have similar information. The greater the detail provided by the client in relation to risks that are to be borne in whole or in part by the contractor, the less the contractor has to price for risk related to the contractor's uncertainty about what the project involves.
In the determination of the final bid figure, several other considerations are relevant8 . The intensity of the competition from other contractors, the costs of financing, insurance and bonding, the financial status of the client, the terms of payment and project cash flow, and the level of the contingency allowance to cover risks, all affect the markup that is added to the prime cost of construction. Tendering contractors' risk analysis has a dimension that is additional to those of the client's risk analysis. Each contractor requires a bid that gives an appropriate balance between the risk of not winning the contract and the risk associated with possible profits or losses if the contract is obtained.
The second rule argues that clients should be obliged to disclose all information that might have a bearing on project risks. By analogy with insurance, disclosure by clients ought to be on an uberrima fides basis7 . In a discussion of Barber's paper9 , it was pointed out that, under English law, an insurer under a contract to which uberrima fides applied had a right to disclaim for nondisclosure, even if the nondisclosure bore no relationship to the claim. If this were applied to construction contracts, the principle would be that the client would have to warrant the completeness and sufficiency of the information disclosed, and the contractor would be entitled to rely on it. There was general support during this discussion for the creation in the UK of a general duty of disclosure of information that was reasonably within the employer's knowledge and that was material to the project, including the design and implementation. The debaters considered that the creation of such a duty in the UK was necessary, even where a contract contained a provision such as Clause 12 of the UK Institution of Civil Engineers Conditions, as, under these conditions, clients sometimes feel inhibited from disclosing information that might subsequently be used as a basis for a claim.
The introduction of a general duty of this kind in the UK would seem to be helpful, but it would not, of course, act as a positive incentive to clients to undertake risk analysis. Clients would still need to be persuaded that this would be in their best interests. A duty to disclose to tendering contractors any risk analysis the client might undertake should not be regarded as a disincentive to carry out risk analysis. Indeed, clients might prefer to pass probabilistic information on to tendering contractors rather than to have them rely on spuriously precise data. In practice, the veracity of probabilistic data would be impossible to confirm after the event. Claims on the basis of misrepresentation of data would be impossible to substantiate. In these circumstances, the transfer of such data would be undertaken in the spirit of offering contractors a fair chance to price for project risk.
The third rule, that pricing should be on broad categories of risk, rather than related to small details, is a realistic approach. An important step in the performance of risk analysis is the identification of factors that can have a major impact on project performance. However, detailed risk analysis may be necessary to determine the relative significance of project risks. Pricing need not consider all project risks in detail, but it does need to be related to major sources of risk.
The fourth rule states that contractors should not be expected to bear risks that cannot be cost-effectively quantified with sufficient certainty, for example the risks of variable ground on a tunnelling project. In such cases, the price ought to be related to what is actually encountered7 . If clients are unduly concerned about bearing such risks, then it will be appropriate for them to undertake the necessary in-depth risk analysis themselves, and to require tendering contracts to price for the risk on the basis of the client's risk analysis. The sharing of such risks is always an option.
It is important for clients to appreciate that, if contractors price for risk and play the role of insurer, this involves important complications associated with adverse selection and moral hazard that have been addressed by economists:
• Contractors who can provide honestly stated goodquality insurance may price themselves out of the market in relation to those who provide dishonestly stated poor-quality insurance at low prices, if sufficient clients are unable to distinguish between good and poor quality, and honesty and dishonesty. As AkerloflO argues, poor quality and dishonesty can drive good quality and honesty out of the market.
• If insurance is cheap, and, when a loss occurs, indemnity is easily recovered, carelessness is encouraged; a degree of pain is essential to keep the insured honest Il
• Clients may become careless of actions, such as changes in plans, with which a contractor must cope to an extent that would not occur if the client bore the cost. Once insurance is in place, excessive demand for claims, analogous to Parsons' excessive carelessness, becomes inevitable, because the marginal cost of such behaviour is altered, and so rational behaviour requires a change in behaviour12
As Arrow argues, although the marginal cost of behaviour is altered by insurance given that there are no constraints on that behaviour, it is both possible and sensible to impose constraints13 Indeed, it would be sensible for the client to impose such conditions on himself in order to obtain appropriate insurance, which may not be forthcoming otherwise.
Because of the moral hazard, complete reliance on economic incentives does not lead to an optimal allocation of resources in general. In most societies alternative relationships are built up which to some extent serve to permit cooperation and risk sharing. The principal—agent relation is very pervasive in all economies and especially in modern ones; by definition the agent has been selected for his specialized knowledge, and therefore the principal can never hope completely to check the agent's performance. You cannot therefore easily take out insurance against the failure of the agent to perform well. One of the characteristics of a successful economic system is that the relations of trust and confidence between principal and agent are sufficiently strong so that the agent will not cheat even though it may be 'rational economic behavior' to do so. The lack of such confidence has certainly been adduced by many writers as one cause of economic backwardness.
CONCLUSIONS
An underlying premise of this paper is that the quality of project risk management can be improved if project risks are appropriately allocated between contracting parties.
At first sight, appropriate allocation might be based on the willingness of parties to take on a risk. However, willingness to bear risk will only result in the conscientious management of project risks insofar as it is based on
e an adequate perception of project risks,  a reasoned assessment of risWreturn tradeoffs, o a real ability to bear the consequences of a risk eventuating,  a real ability to manage the associated uncertainty, and thereby mitigate risks.
Willingness to bear risk should not be a criterion for risk allocation when it is based on
an inadequate perception of project risks,  a false perception of ability to bear the consequences of risk eventuating, o a need to obtain work, e false perceptions of the risk/return tradeoffs of transferring risks to another party.
The willingness of a contracting agent to bear risk will generally be influenced by the premium that he/she is able to charge for this. However, experience of the construction industry suggests that tenderers are often faced with a tender-submission deadline that only permits a scanty appraisal of the complex construction problems and risks involved in a project. In the absence of adequate time and information, any evaluation and pricing of potential risk exposure may be on a perfunctory and ad hoc basis.
Regarding contracting agents as quasiinsurers suggests pricing rules analogous to insurance law and practice. This implies full disclosure of all relevant
Chris Chaptnan is Professor of' Management Science and Head of the Department of Accounting and Management Science at the University of Southampton. For about 15 years his consulting and research have centred on the management of risk. Most of his consulting has been concerned with large energy projects in the UK, and USA and Canada, but other concerns have included computer hardware and software systems, financial asset and commoditv broking portfolio management. He holds a BASc in Industrial Engineering (Toronto), an MSc in ()perational Research ( Birmingham) and a PhD in Economics and Econonaetrics (Southampton).
information available to the client, and, in particular, disclosure by the client of all information that might have a bearing on project risks. It is important to appreciate that a contracting agent pricing for risk and playing the role of insurer involves important complications associated with adverse selection and moral hazard.
Effective project procurement requires that all parties involved understand and accept in an honest manner risks appropriately allocated to them, and that these risks are effectively managed. This requires explicit formal risk analysis. Whatever form of contract is adopted, there is a need for much more careful attention to risk analysis and management by all parties, and a need for a more cooperative attitude that avoids moral hazards.
This research was supported by SERC grant GR/E 48343.
Bernard Curtis worked on site as a project manager on a variety of major civil-engineering schemes before becoming a lecturer in construction management. He now acts as a civil-engineering and building-works consultant and arbitrator, concentrating on contractual and project-management issues. His interest in improving the performance of the construction industry is pursued through his being a consultant research managerfor CIRIA, a constructionmanagement research monitor for the UK Science and Engineering Research Council, and a research fellow at Southampton University, UK.
Stephen Ward is a senior lecturer in Business Economics and Academic Deputy Director of the Management School at the University of Southampton, UK. Before joining the University in 1980, he worked in operational research with the National Westminster Bank, UK, and in merchandizing with Boots, UK. His research interests include project and contract risk management, strategic-investment appraisal and problem-solving methodology. He recently completed a UK Science and Engineering Research Council research contract on the roles, risks and responsibilities of management contractors in the construction industry. He holds a BSc in Mathematics and Physics (Nottingham University, UK) and an MSc in Management Science (Imperial College, London University, UK).
1 Barnes, M (and partners) 'Management contracting
Curtis, B 'Roles, responsibilities and risk in manage-
for health building — a comparative study' Summary
Report UK Department of Health and Social
tions from interviews with senior management in
Security (1984)
client, professional and contracting organizations
2 Perry, J G and Hayes, R W 'Risk management for
during above SERC funded research programme)
project managers' Buil.d. Tech. & Manage. (Aug/
Barber, J N 'Risks in the method of construction' in
Reference 9
3 Ward, S C and Chapman, C B 'Extending the use of
Ward, S C and Chapman, C B 'Developing com-
risk analysis in project management' Int. J. Project
petitive bids: a framework for information process-
ing' J. oper. Vol 39 No 2 (1988) pp 123-
4 Abrahamson, M 'Contractual risks in tunnelling:
how they should be shared' Tunnels & Tunnelling
Uff, J and Capper, P (Eds.) Construction Contract
Improved Procedures and Practice Centre of
5 Beard, J E 'Risk allocation through contract
Construction Law and Management, King's College,
Akerlof, G A 'The market for "lemons":
uncertainty and the market mechanism' Quart. J. Econ. Vol 84 (1970) pp 488-500
11 Parsons, T A Treatise on the Law of Marine Insurance and General Average (Vol 1) (1868)
12 Pauly, M V 'The economics of moral hazard:
comment' Amer. Econ. Rev. Vol 58 (1968) pp 531— 537
13 Arrow, K J 'The economics of moral hazard: further comment' Amer. Econ. Rev. Vol 58 (1968) pp 537-538
142	International Journal of Project Management
