Conslruction Management and Economics, 1991, 9, 31 1 •-325
Profitability of UK construction contractors
AKINTOLA AKIN TOYE and MARTIN SKIT MORE
Department J Civil Engineering, University QfSa(/0rd, Salford M5 4 WT, UK
This paper describes three analyses to examine differences in con.srruction company POT profitability between ( l) different financial years and (2) d? fferent sizes QT companies. In the first analysis, the aggregated profitability QTa sarnple 0/80 UKgeneral contractors wasfound not to significantlyfrom 3.23 0/1, for each year ofthe period examined. The size ( turnocer) ofcompanies, however, was signtficantly and positively correlated with prefitability. The second analysis, of a sub-sample of eight very large companies, showed that profitability enhancement was associated with diversification into house building and other related activities. The third analysis, of110 speculal.ib'e house builders, showed profit margins to be aroundfour times those Qfgeneral contractors but uncorrelated with company size. Systematic changes were found, however, over the period involved.
In all cases, the variability ofprofitability between companies was./bund to reduce with company size, implying a greater consistency in rhe financial performance ef larger companies.
Profitability, company size, turnover growth, diversification, pricing policies.
Introduction
In the business cycle, thc achievement of an appropriate profit level, or profitability, is very important for a firm's survival and growth. Profitability is said to be a function of three factors (Wright, 1970):
The margin of profit earned.
Profitability may be expressed as a profit percentagc of turnover (POT) or return on capital investment (ROI). (Turnover, here, has the same meaning as sales volume, while the return is gross profit.)
Both POT and ROI have been used in studies of profitability in the construction industry. Lea and Lansley (1975a,b) and Lenard and Heathcote (1 990), for instance, used the average return on turnover. Asenso and Fcllows (1 987), on the other hand, used two measures: (l ) the pre-tax return on net assets employed and (2) the return on (equity) shareholders' Investment.
One argument against the use of POT as a measure of profitability is that firms may achieve apparently high profitability primarily because of the high net asset involved. Apart from this, howevcr, there is little to choose between the two approaches, as implied by Wright's three factors above.
Wright has specifically termed ROI, or total assets less current liabilities, 'profitability', as
0144-6193/91 so-3.00+.12 	1991 E. & F.N. spon Ltd.
it seems most accurately to encapsulate the ! evel of financial achieveme: tt against the longterm funds committed to the business. Howcver, the practice of subcontracting in the construction industry may not el'courage firms to increase thc•'ä nct assets despite increases in workload. This may exaggeratc construction company profitability based on litt assetc when compared with, for instance, manufacturing comoar-tics. As a result, profit gcnerally, in terms of excess income over expenditure, is still the most important criterion for an action in the construction industry today (Fellows and Langford, 1980).
Empirical studies in the ficld have been mainly concerned with the relationship between profitability and the size of firms (Asenso and Fellows, 1987). In some cases (Hall and Wc: Samuel and Smith, 1968), a strong relationship has bccn founc- whereas in others (Singh and Whittington. 1968; Lea and Lanslcy. 1975a•, Ase.nso and Fellows, 1987) the results have been inconclusive.
Two of thesc studies relate specifically to the construction industry. Lea and Lansley (1975a.b) examined a samp! c of 23 construction firms to ascertain the effects of the extreme fall in demand for building work over a 2-year period ending in 1975. As a. rcsult, they were able to conclude that the management of thcse firms should have considered reducing thciv overheads rather than profit Enargins as a means of survival during this In addressing the relationship between size and profitability, tliey also found that:
There was no indication that r PC)'I'] profitabiiity depended on the size of the . . nor indeed has therc beza in other studies. so that high profitability in terrns of return on turnover and capital -evasjust as accessible to the small as the large firms provided their management was good. Afi analysis carr: ed out for the stildy showed no clear relationship bet'sve.en the total dematid on the inoastry and either total turnover or the average annual profitabilit't of the industry as indicated by the average profitability figures ava.ilable.
Aseq.so and Fellows' (1987) W0fk-, based on nn analysis of 41 firms that were classified into four groups on the basis of their net assets employcd, tended to endorse Lea and L,ansley's observations regarding the lack of a relationship betwccr, pi•ofitabdity and size. In addition, however, they found that the dispersion bet-wee" construction companies' profitability tended to decrease with the size of ccmpany, suggesting that the larger firms in their sampie exhibited a greater stability of profitability. Also, a p, rvasive ficgative trend in averagc profitability was found over the period under study (1975-- 79, 1980-
Several orohlcms arise from these two studies that are worthy of mention. t,ca and Lansley, for instance, neglected to provide anv indication of the numbers of groups considered in relation to the independency of size of firms find profitability. Asenso and Fellows, on thc other hand, provide no figures in support of their conclusions. Also. theif sample size seems rather small for any generalizations to be nra„de. It is interesting to rac: c, however, that Lea and Lansley found an average POT level 2.50 for thc firrns over the 10-year period studied. but their sample size was also v•cry small.
These results are of significance for students ef contractors' pricing strategies, a field which the authors arc currcntly active. The evidence above suggests that contractors may be primarily concerned wi_th making appropriate ('normal') profits [elative thcir investmci. level and the to satisfy associated shareholders with reasonao dividends.
Lea and Lansley (1975b) identified several situations where contractors find it difficiJlt to meet this normal profit. Low profits may be caused by low mark-up values in contract bidding in order to cnhence the prospccts of work acquisitioo. Fellows and Langford 1980)
Copyright 0 2001 . All Ri hts Reseved.
found that some firms deliberately make low profits only in the short term by 'buying work' to survive in recession periods or in order to obtain further work from the same source. The problem of course is that, although this strategy may lead to long-term profits, the dangers of underestimating production costs are ever-present, thereby increasing the risk of failure.
The indications from previous research are that low profitability levels predominate construction contracting. This could be intentional in the short term, with the expectation of profit maximization in the long term, or possibly due to unfamiliarity with the risks involved in contract bidding, or simply due to the effect of persistent keen competition in the industry. Whatever the cause, the result is that a firm may not necessarily make a profit on every tender won. Paradoxically, however, a firm is nevertheless expected to make adequate profits on its total annual business activities if it is to continue to remain in business.
In order to clarify the issue further, some empirical confirmation of the low profitability of construction companies is needed. The analysis described here was aimed at providing evidence of this nature together with some insights into the possible causal mechanisms involved.
Following previous approaches, the profitability of a sample of 80 construction contracting companies is examined (yearly profitability generally and profitability classified by size of companies), a critical examination is made of the business activities of eight major contractors and, finally, the profitability of 110 house builders is compared with that of general contractors.
The data for this work were obtained from four sources: (1) Extel Statistical Services Ltd publications of companies' financial accounts (Extel Group, 1983), (2) individual firms' annual financial profit and loss accounts, (3) Building journal (Cooper, 1988) and (4) InterCompany Comparison (ICC) Business Ratio Ltd (1989).
The study was conducted in three parts with the aim of identifying trends in annual profitability of construction companies and relationships with the diffrent business activities of the companies.
Part I considers the POT profitability of contractors between 1980 and 1987 inclusive, a period of economic recovery for the construction industry. The contractors for this analysis were selected at random from those whose annual financial accounts are published by Extel. A total of 120 companies were selected for analysis. As the libraries consulted maintained Extel information for the previous 5 years only, the information was supplemented by inspection of the prior printed annual financial accounts of the individual companies concerned. Another problem was that some of the selected companies had either ceased trading or merged with other companies, thus preventing the collection of a full set of records. These were discarded from the sample, leaving a total of 80 companies for analysis.
The measure of profitability used here was based on the profit level as a proportion of volume of sales, due to the relevance of turnover to construction output for each year. Three analyses were made:
An analysis of the ycayåy aggregated profitability of thc 	companies.
An anaiysis of profitabiliar by company sizc
Aff analysis of company grow-Eh in turn
As the resuhs or thcsg-.: r, nalyscs indicated Ihat vc.V3• low profitability levels are obtaincu generally. the need for an adequatc diviuend for shareholders suzgested that other relate busincss iiiay be providing rc! atively highcr returns than pure contvac,ting- This proposition is examined in Part oy considering son; e of the other business activities of the firms inwolvcd. This involved thc study of eight of the very large cotnpanies in the samp2c the years 1986 and 1 987 from Extcl and Building data sources. This has been supplemented with an analysis o! house-building profit Inargiu•, pubkished by ICC Business Ratio Ltd.
Part _3 describes the an'alysis of the PO-t- profitability of house biji! dcrs bctween 1986 and 1988. This is bascd on the profit margins of 1 10 house builders published bv ICC-I Ltd. Thi.s analysis considered aggregate profitability. with respect 10 company size. for ccmpamcs in the house-building sector for comparison with gcncral conti-actc,rs. The main mm wæs to corroborate thc results round in Part 2 in that house-buildinu work was generally n profitability-enhancing activity for mos( construction (inns over the pcriod.
The mean and standard deviation annual profitability as a percentage of t.Llrnover from 198() shown in Tat! the lor the period bung .
the differences In me.}jns between years are not great- A ANOVA confirms this 000) and Bartlett-Box's tests (F = 6.85 P =0 000) indicatc significant diticrcrjccs in standard deviations. negativc corrclation of standard devia tion With (r P suggests a greater consistency at higher profitability le Is
Thc reoorted annual turnover E} . . •e companjc,s were deflated by i-ebasing 10 1980 by thc standard retail pricc index ana p! ottcd against the gnrafitability achieved (Fi2. 1 ). No trend is obscrvablc„ except that the spread of profitability levels seems to reduce increasing size of comnanie; In fact, a significant positive correlation of ().084 (P- 0.01 7 j was found, indicating 	profitability to be highc•,• for \argc; • companies. Dividing the companies into three size groupings of up to fl I rnillion, E1 1 45 million and over €45 million gave reducing standard deviations of 4.80. 3.60 and 2.08 rcspcctively (Cochraii's C = ().5723, P=O.OOO; 10 =0.000).
Copyright.O.2004..,...All..Ri hts..Reseved.
Profitability of 80 construction firms, 1980-87
Profit	Total annual margin	turnover
Simultaneous analysis of company size and annual profitability
A two-way ANOVA (covariance) produced F ratios of 4.92 (P =0.027) and 1.41 (P = 0.199) for the effects of company size and year respectively, indicating only company size to be significantly and positively correlated with mean profitability, confirming the above results.
The lack of any significant difference between the yearly mean profitability of the companies studied is surprising in view of the well-known trends in cost and price movements that occurred during this period. This period, starting from 1980, witnessed an annual increment rate of 6.3% in building cost levels compared with a 3.3% equivalent increment in tender price index. With this particularly dramatic discrepancy between published cost and price indices in the early years of the period, significant changes in profitability were confidently expected over the years involved.
On reflection, however, there is some evidence that construction company POT profitability has always been around 3%. Lea and Lansley (1975a) found a 2.5% POT average for the 10-year period thcy studied (1960-70). In the USA, Park's (1966) study of the pre-tax profit of 39000 contracting firms produced an average of 3.5%. Other UK studies (Llewellyn, 1973; Burgess, 1973) found 2.5% POT to be the average for the construction industry. Thus profitability in the construction industry seems to have been hovering around 3% (Flanagan, 1990) irrespective of the state of the market.
Rather less of a surprise is the generally low level of profitability achieved by contracting companies, probably as a result of the high levels of competition involved in competitive tendering. Southwell (1971), Lea and Lansley (1975b), Fellows and Langford (1980), Beeston (1982), Raftery (1987), Lenard and Heathcote (1990) and many others have remarked on the role of keen competition in forcing contractors to apply low mark-up values in order to obtain work and maintain a share of thc market. Although mark-up and profitability are manifestly not the same (mark-up may often be regarded as a prior estimate of profitability), it is nevertheless reasonable to assume that the two are at least positively correlated; in which case, increased competition should result in lower profitability, as predicted by standard economic theory.
Cooper (1988) suggests that the diminution of overseas contract opportunities has made
Turnover profitability for 80 compamcs.
thc domesüc market more coi71pctitive. "[he cxpectation thereforc is a reduction in profitability, manifestly lacking ifi these data.
All construction projects involve elcmcnts of risk that aflkwt powntial gains or IGSSCS to contractors. Such risks arc covered in project selection decision_s by either analytical or subicctivc assessments (Wolf and Kallev, 1983) and later in the form of contingency amounts included in bids (Artlo, 1986). Of coursc, when thesc risks fail to materialize, thc contingenc.% converts to profit In management contractinp, as the client carries most of the contractua_l liability for risks, the potential for contractor contingency- profit ccmeersion is limited, an argulncnt that may have been intended by Cooper as one of the reasons for the low profitability of 'most' construction firms involved in management contracting today. Management contracting docs aot appear to be an expanding field as one would be mad.e to believe however, recent surveys (Morrison, 1986%.b, 1989) finding only I -3% of contfacts bcing Ict on this basis.
Spedding (1977) suggests that low profitability cray bc due part_ly to resource forecastir; g. inaccuracies and cost rccovery shortfalls, both being related to thc high levels of unccrtavr: in the industry, making contractors' pricing something of a garrjble. "I hus the reason that larger comoanies aro more profitable may be that large firms are generally more ctficicnt and better organizcd than small firms in their management strategies, while at the samc time being better off in potentially low profitability situations (cf. auslev 197 S? Y It is also possible that larger firms have bctter defined pricing policies and objectivos together with well diversified business activities.
The findinp that. variability bctween convany profitability jcvels decreases with increasing company sizc is consistent with that of Asen,so and Fellows (1987). This tends to suggest that larger companies are more consistent and similar to each other than sr-nallef companies in terms of estimating, pricing aud production. This may be becaune of the increased leve\ of competition or market awarcness among larger contractors whichm together with low margins generally, restricts the potential for viable alternatives.

Growth in size offirms and turnover
Table 2 shows the turnover growth index compared with annual average profitability. Despite increases in turnover between 1983 and 1987, as indicated by the growth index, profitability was decreasing (a negative relationship), implying that increases in industry workload do not necessarily guarantee higher profitability.
Relationship between turnover growth and profit level
Turnover growth index (at 1980 prices), Turngrow
Average profit margin (%), Profcent
Turngrow = 138.1 — 10.89 Profcent.
The following conclusions were drawn regarding the analysis in Part I :
Construction company POT profitability was generally quite small (around 3.2%).
There was no significant changes in POT profitability over the years 198()—87.
There was a positive correlation between POT profitability and size of company.
The variability of POT profitability between companies was negatively correlated with company size, suggesting that larger companies were more consistent and similar to each other than smaller companies in terms of estimating, pricing or production.
There is no evidence of any positive relationship between changes in turnover and POT profitability; thus a firm's growth does not necessarily ensure higher profitability.
Results of Part 2
So far, we have established that company size is important in terms of expected POT profitability. The average profitability of the 80 contruction firms studied between 1980 and 1987 was 3.2%. Compared with other industries, this may be considered to be rather low, especially as the .3.2% is a pre-tax profit margin.
In classical economic theory, it is generally assumed that individuals/firms try to maximize profits in the long term. If returns on capital are low in construction work, then investors should be attracted away from construction into other more profitable industries. Nevertheless, the industry does continue to attract new investment, as evidenced by the increasing number of company registrations. Between 1980 and 1987, the registration of private construction contractors increased by 54% (Government Statistics Service, 1988), while average profitability remained generally constant.
One possible reason for this is that firms are really making more profit margin than the statistics reveal. Companies may be deliberately reporting low profits in order to reduce their tax, or firms are engaged in othCi' business activiticc  or ol_herwise) that •neratc addÆtional profits to supplcmcnt low construction profits. Thus, contracting work may be used to set off tax against other business activities. l'hiS would go sotuc way to explain why larger firms produce higher profitability t_han snvaller fii-rns, as larger firms are known to have a biggcr investnocnt base and therefowe a greater capability of investment in other activities.
This notion prompted an analysis f the business activities of 13 rgcr firms. A sub-sample of 8 of the 22 very large identified in Part I %vvere selected for analysis for the years 1986 87. the data being derivcd froi7i (Cooper, ! 988), and cross-checked with the annual financial accounts of companies invobcd.
T'he total turnovcr of these eight compa nies fer ! he 2 years under study was Ej .50 and €8.7 z hillion respectively, constituting at least 1 5 0 0 of the of I JK construction output for these yea: s, a huge proportion the indnstry's considering that 74 948 aod 75 81() companies registered as either building contractors, building and civii engineering contractors or pore\y civil caginccring contractors in 1986 and 1987 respectively (Government Statistics SCfVäce, 1988). Five analyses were unoertakt•n:
The types of business activities carried out.
2. 'TIhe annual POT profitability of the 	by individual business type.
The contribution of cach bnsiness type to total annual turnovcr.
4. r i'he contribution of each ousincss type to total annual profitability.
5. '[he disparities in profitability bet*uc.en business types.
'The aim of these was to show that while construction firms may achieve only low profitability for their primary activity, son-iC hr: wc diversified iatc, othcr profitabhe vcntures or construction-related activities that compensate for this low nuirgifi.
Tvpes business ac.! il'iiies of construction Jit-ms
"The eiglit construction firms wc. e involved io business activities that can broadly be classified into three sectors:
9 house-building construction; gcneral building and civil eagineering construction contractinp:
• other construction-rclRtcd activities.
Tahle 3 surnmarizes the activities comprising the final sec: to.r and the 1iülT,bcr of fifms involved in each..
The market structure for house buildins: quitc diflércnl to that for gerveral contractiüg. (}eneral contracting work mostly procurcd by government. private firms, corporations and groups of individuals. House building. on the other hand. is oft-cn procurzu individuals. Other construction-related activities a*-e either in the form of procurement or supportive services for house building or general contracting.
During the period between 1985 and 1987. housing construction was booming. whereas the general contracting market was rather depressed (Ctooper, 1989), -k'.'hich may ha•. encouraged firms to divert more re«ourccs into house building. rvarket pcs:

Construction-related activities of a sub-sample of eight very large construction firms
Other construction-related	Number of activities	firms
Building services, including mechanical and electrical	2 engineertng
Property development and investment	7
changed and commercial and industrial building (property development) has boomed instead. Cooper (1989) — reporting on an analysis of 12 top construction firms — found new house sales to be down by 30% in 1988, work having stopped on some sites, probably due to rising mortgagc interest rates.
The difference in house-building market structure could well reflect on profitability in this sector, which has been consistently high. CIBS Securities Europe claim that despitc the low house-building rate and the then boom in commercial and industrial work, a turnover of E 100 million in housing meant E25 million in profits, while design and build contracts (the basis for most speculative commercial and industrial buildings) make only {4 million on the same turnover (Cooper, 1989).
Profitability a.nd business types
The POT profitability of these firms on all their business activities put together was 6% (1.87 S.D.) and 6.78% (2.36 S.D.) in 1986 and 1987 respectively, These are clearly well abovc the 3.45% recorded for general contracting work for this company size between 1980 and 1987. The question is: 'What other activities could bc responsible for this increase in margin? ' This necessitate the analysis of turnover for the three business types involvcd.
Table 4 shows the POT profitability of the three business types, indicating that other construction-related activities and house building generated a much higher profitability than general contracting. Caution should be taken here as this can only be confirmed by the proportion of total turnover that gives these turnover values.
Profitability by work type

House building
Building and civil engineering works
Construction-related works
A multivariatc analysis of variance (M ANOVA) was undertaken 10 determine thc importance of business typc (FT 1 .76. d f. = 2- P =0.000), the contractors involved - ? , P —0.496) and the business year (l -0.24, d.f. - l P- factors associated with changes in profitability - with only business type showing tlp reaturca statistical significancc. Thus, after removing the (significant) business type effects, neither differences betwcen companies nor differences between years could be trcated as anyr üling other than simple sampling effects.
Contributions Qf business t vpe to total annual prefil and turnover
'*he contr; but.ion of busincs& type to total annual profit and 'urnover is summarized in Table 5 for 1986 and 1987. Despite contracting work contributing 56% of the avcrage POT". its contribution to profit was thc least (23% on average). .ouse-bui! ding activities contributed the least to turnover and the greatcqt to profit. Other constructiou-rclatcd activitics competed keenly with house building. This suggests that general contracting work supplied most of the finance for the other activities of thc firms, but the most profit was made from house building and other construction-rclated work.
Profit and turnover contributions by work type
% of total profit	% of total turnover
Results of Part
Thc fact that speculative house building gcnerally produced a higher profit margin is peculiar to the eight top firms analysed in Part 2. *f'his high profitability is corroborated by our analysis of the profit margin of 1 10 firms engaged in house building in thc UK, as published by ICC Business Ratio Ltd. This statistical analysis covered 1986 to 1988.
Profitability in relation compo-ny house-bu%ding .size
The aggregated annual company profitability over thc 3 years was 12.55% (7.79 S.D. A twoway ANOVA (covariance) indicated significant differences in profitability betwccn yea.. , 17.604, d.f. = 2, P but not between size (F=0.002, d.f. .
companies' turnovers on house building (used here as a measure of company size) were divided into three equal size groupings on the basis of 1980 rebased turnover as in our previous analysis. This showed that the small firms in the sample (i.e. those with low speculative house-buildin; r activity) had the largest profitability spread generally over the
.Copyright02001.
The analysis on a yearly basis (Table 6) showed standard deviations decreasing with the firms' size generally.
Growth in turnover and relationship with profit margin
This period witnessed a growth in turnover with respect to house building, as shown by the changes made in grouping turnover in an attempt to make the groupings more equal in size for the purpose of statistical analysis (Table 6). Turnover in this period was positively correlated with the profit margin (t - —16.34, d.f.
Statistical analysis of house-building profit margin by year
Group turnover (Em)	Count	SD.
Less than 8.5
Less than 10 358.88  38 6.65
Less than 12.5	3710.41
Cochran's C -0.52 (P=O.008)
Explanations for this trend
Of most interest here is the much greater levels of profitability found in the house-building sector (mean 12.55%) than in general contracting (mean 3.23%). House building is highly differentiated from general contracting in terms of capital outlay, market structure, level of competition, cash flow profile, pricing policies and costs. Any or all of these could be responsible for the different profitability levels in house building and contracting work. The same argument applies to property development and investment, which tend to have the
saqne attributcs as house building. On the othcr hand. alth .ugh constfuct.ion contracting IS not generally capital-intcnsivc (Hillebrand{, 1990), a huge proportion of profitability in house building could bc in the forlli of on capital tied up ill resources (c.g land, finance, etc.) required or spcculative housing procurcrnent or the proceeds from ihe dc; nand and supply equations for speculativc housc bDijdinp.
Also, it would seem that speculative residential work has a greater potential for profit for all concerned than work in other sectors, perhaps due to the more quantifiable naturc of thc market price and likely returns. I ,copold and Bishop ( 983 ) concluded that profit from buiidinz comes from two sources - market price, which includcs mark-up orn cest of production. and additional mark-up Oii developtncnt gain. Lenard and Hcathcote's (1990) analysis also supports the notion that high profit nrargins on speculnt_ivc house build: ng are based purely on economic considerations rather than the nature of work involved.
Another possibility is that the intensity of cornpctition is less for rcsidcnlial than other types of wcuk. A survey by Niss (1965) found that most house builders and genera: contractors used fixed and variable mark-up policics respcctively variablc mark-up policies depended on the nun-Iber of competitors involved (average 3.6 and 7.0 0 for house building and general contracting rcspectively). which in iüfii  to current market conditions, a function of the demand for constrtii-*tion work gencrallv. These differcnces suggest xeneral contracting to be more competitivc than housc which may be forcing general contractors into strategic market-orient-cd pricing rnanoeuvrcs order to survivc.
The level of risk is another underlying factor. Obviously, in speculative house building and property de'.clopmcnt, firms arc know; i to act as both client and contractor, and hcnc.t do not have the opportunity to distribute the risk involved to othr: On the other haro•-_! contracting risks, at least, are shared by clients and contractors. Howevcr, general contracts are known to be larger than house bililding in tertns of size (contraci sum), although they arc mainly of a one •off nature. House building is usually repctitivc (prototypes same or different sites), resulting ili the advantages of learning effects. Ho•vever, any mistake made on contracting work could have far-reaching effects on thc annual profitability of a firm, as a project could rcpreselii a sizeable proportion of a firm's annual turnover, whe reas sinilar mistake on house building could bc corrccted on the subsequent prototypes.
The constancy of profit margin of the 80 contractors over thc peliod of study suggests a similar conclusion to that of Niss- i.c- increased intensity of competition fcsults in less profitability, although it is doubtful that the level of cotnpetition rcrnained the same throughout the peiiod examined. [n this case, o•thcr factors especially the diversification strategies discussed above - sccm to have combined with competition and demand to produce thc effects observed. As a sti-ategy for profitability diversification may be more easiiY accomplished by larger firms with huge cash flows (Hillebrandt. 1990). Figure 2 shows thc activities of large construction firms to offsct the risk or being subjected to the ups and downs of the construction markct. This supports the commcnt made by [he chief executive of one of the top cons-tuclion firms in thc UK, that 'one o? the beauties of his firm being a large construction firm and having a 101 of activities is the opportnnity to move resources around to high profit construction-related vcnturcs .
The increased consistency of profitability for larger genes_al contracting companies is also evident among these house builders, suggesting that both company size a',rd activity are associated factors. What is diffcult to explain, however, is the differencc in the impact of the factors on mean profitability levels - company size being significant and yearly trends
Predominantly

HIGH (Fluctuating)
Profit Morgin Depends mainly on factors determining the demand for residential works
HIGH Profit Margin Depends on firrn l s flexibility to divert resources to profit marking construction rekoted activities
Profitability enhancement in the UK construction industry.
(198()--87) insignificant in general contracting, but yearly trends (1986—88) significant and company size insignificant in house building. It is likely that the recent housing 'boom' may be an influencing factor.
Summary and conclusion
The analyses described in this paper indicate the existence of a positive correlation between the size and POT profitability of the construction companies studied. After removing this effect, and contrary to expectations, average profitability was not found to change significantly from year to year. Evidence was also found to suggest that larger contractors were more consistent regarding their profitability levels.
An investigation into the possible reasons for the differences in profitability between companies showed the degree and type of diversification into different activities, particularly house building, to be major factors associated with enhanced profitability.
The apparent stability of profitability at about 3% POT per annum found in this, and
other Gil-nilar st-üdics, suggests the  some underlying homznstaüc mec arnsm which diversificauon tnay play a part
We are indebted to twe anonyn; ous referees for their most valuable and constructive corntnents on an carlier draft of this paper, v..'hich resulted iri the analysiq "escribed in Pari addiii0ü to so' dl hnportant textoal amendments.
Asenso, H.O. and Fellovvr s. R.F. (1987). Profit3bility and size of U.K. contractors. Buiiding 1 echnolog_v and 	—Mari)! a pp. 19 20 bees-ton, i). Estiayating itiarkct variation. Building Cost Fechniqves - N'ew Direc: ions (edited by P.s. Brandon), pp. 265-77. E- and F.N. Soon, L,ondon.
Burgess, R.A. ( 197.3). The Construction Industr•, llandhook. Medical and Technical Pübiishing Lancastci .
Cjooper, P. (1988). Winning the pro'.•tt stakes. Buiiding, 13 May. pp. 3Q- 33
The boom's a b alåc,on.r 	Building, 12 May, pp. 20- P 2
Extel Group '1 983). oel Statistical Services. Extel classified indx,	unquoted comoany service (updated to 1983). Extel Financial J.,td.
Fianagam R, (1990). Making international comparisons ; ilC global construction fiiHFkct. Proceedings of the internalional Council for Building, Research Studies and Documentation CIB W-55/65 Symposiuni, in Building Economies and ('onswuctio; Manaaer ent, Vol. 3. pp. 230 46, Sydney.
Manageynem, October, pp. 36 --0
Governme.iii Statistics Service (1988). PrÉl',ate  I lousing and Consiruction Statistics Supplemep3. 1 977--88. HMSO. London.
M. and Yleiss, L -W. (1967). Fifins' Gze and profil'ability. Retie-w Q/' Economics and Statistics. 1967
Hillebrandt, P.M. ( 1990). Managerncnt of building firms. Proceedings of the International Q,ouncil for Building, Research Studies and Documentation C'fB W•55/65 Symposium, Managcmenr the Building Firm, Vol. 6. pp. 10.
Inter.-Cornpany Compa risnn (ICC) Business Ratio Ltd (1989). , ousebuilding profit Margin 1986 1988. IC*C Financial Surveys.
Lea- H, and Lansley, P. (1975b). Management for survival. Buildingm 21 March, pp. 103--- 106.
Lcnardn D. and Heathcote. Profitability and risk in the Australian rcsideatia! construct_i0! ) industry. Proceedings of the international Counci! for Building. Research Studies and Docilmcatation C.IB W- S S/6.5 Symposiurn, Value in Building Economics a: Construction Managern_ent; Vol. I . pp. 171—80, Sydney.
Leopold, E. and Bishop, D. (1983). Design phi\osophy and practice in speculative housing: Construciion Manaaanent and Economics.
i). ( 19731 _	riccs to be firm or not to be firm? Building. 2(_) July,
Moa-ison- N. (1986a). 	news. Chartered Quantit'y; January, pp.
Copyright 	Ri hts.R.eseved..
Morrison, N. (1986b). Contract use after 1985. Chartered Quantity Surveyor, December, pp. 12—14.
Morrison, N. (1989). Contracts in use. Chartered Quantity Surveyor, January, pp. 24--6.
Niss, J.F. (1965). Custom production, theory and practice: With special reference on the goals and pricing procedures of the contract construction industry. PhD thesis, University of Illinois, Urbana, Ill.
Park, W.R. (1966). The Strategy of Contracting for Profit. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Raftery, J. (1987). The state of cost/price in the U.K. construction industry — A multi criteria approach. In Building Cost Modelling and Computers (edited by P.S. Brandon), pp. 49—72. E. and F.N. Spon, London.
Samuel, J.M. and Smith, D.J. (1968). Profits, variability of profits and firms' size. Economica, May, pp. 127-39.
Singh, A. and Whittington, J. (1968). Growth, Profitability and Valuation. Occasional Paper No. 7, Cambridge University, Cambridge.
Southwell, J. (1971). Building Cost Forecasting: Selected Papers on a Systematic Approach to Forecasting Building Cost. RICS Publications, London.
Spedding, A.H. (1977). Trends and prices in primary school buildings. PhD thesis, University of Leeds.
Wolf, C. and Kailey, G.S. (1983). Risks management in cost engineering — application of utility theory. American Association of Cost Engineers 27th Annual Meeting, Philadelphia, Penn.
Wright, M.G. (1970). Profit and competition: Profitability. Building Technology and Management, December, pp. 4_6.
Profitability of UK construction contractors	313
Co ri ht 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.
Co ri ht 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.
Profitability of UK construction contractors	313
All Ri hts Reseved.
Co ri ht 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.
All Ri hts Reseved.
Profitability of UK construction contractors	319
All Ri hts Reseved.
Co ri ht 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.
Profitability of UK construction contractors	319
Co ri ht 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.

Profitability of UK construction contractors	319
Co ri ht 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.

All Ri hts Reseved.
Profitability 	UK construction contractors	325
Profitability 	UK construction contractors	325
Co ri ht 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.
Co ri ht 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.
Profitability 	UK construction contractors	325
Co ri ht 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.
