Construction Management and Econonücs, 1991 , 9, 403, 429
The construction contract bidder homogeneity assumption: An empirical test
This paper describes an empirical study to test lhe proposition that all construction contract bidders are hornogeneous. i.e. they can be treated as behaving collectively in an identical (statistical) manner. An examination Qfprevious analyses ofbidding data repeals a flaw in the method elstandardizing bids across differenl size contracts and a new procedure is proposed which involves the e.stilnation Q/'a contract datum.
Three independent .sels Q/' bidding data were then subjected [o this procedure and estimates Q/ the necessary distributional poratneter.s obtained. These were then tested against the bidder homogeneity asszunption, resulting in the (tonclusion thal the assumption may be appropriate fbr a three-parameter lognormal shape. bul not Ibr scale and location.
Introduction
Statistical models or construction contract bids have been used to indicate the likely effects of changed bidding strategies (Capen et al., 1971 : Finc and Hackemar, 1970; Flanagan and Norman, 1985; Friedman, 1956; Grinyer and Whittaker, 1973; Hossein, 1977; McCaffer, 1 976; Mitchell, 1977: Oren and Rothkopf, 1975; Park, 1966; ShaflZr and Micheau, 1971 ; Skitmore, 1982: Weverbergh, 1982; Whittaker, 1970), estimating practices (Barnes, 1971 : Beeston, 1982; Morrison. 1984; Morrison and Stevens, 1980; Skitmore, 1981 ), procurement policies (AICBC)R, 1967: Johnston, 1978: Wilson and Sharpe. 1988) and contractor selection (Cauwelaert and Heynig, 1978).
Many theoretical models have been proposed to represent the probability distribution of construction contract bids but relatively few have becn derived empirically (Skitmore, 1989). Most of the empirical studies examine the effect of contract characteristics (type, size, number of bidders, procurement system. ctc.) on the frequency distribution of pooled bids under the assumption that all bidders can be treated as behaving collectively in an identical (statistical) manner (Runeson, 1988; Whittaker, 1970; Wilson and Sharpe, 1988). This assumption is quite crucial in the analysis and, if inappropriate, could easily invalidate the results and proposals contained in these studies. Studies of individual bidding behaviour (Flanagan and Norman, 1 985; Harvey, 1979; McCalTer, 1976), on the other hand, have made no attempt to test the suitability of the collectivc model.
In contemplating the design of such a test, it is clear that, as construction contracts are rarely of a sinlilar size, some method is needed by which bids can be conipared between contracts irrespective of the contract size. 'l'he popular approach to this problem is to take
the ratio of the bids to sot-nc i7ieasure of contract size (e.g. bid bid or designer s esRii1iate) as the '.)bscrvational incasurc Oi aüalyr sis. This has bcc•v, iound however. on the grounds that the distribution of data standardized in this is not directly cornpa with the distribution of thc unstand_ardized bids (Johnston. 1978). Alsa.. as the statistical properties of ratios ha ve Feccived relatively little treatyncnt in thco.c.•tical statistics. formulation of the relationship between the distribution of ratio standardized bids and the unstandardized bids is certain to bc a major task. iL In order to sien plifv n.nv possible future applications of the ensuing models. it seem beti to avoid ratio distributions altogether.
One altCf native approach is to take the difference the contract size o nd bids as lhc observational measure. a l'ncthod used bv Weverbcrgh { 1970) ifl his analysis of consortiutn bids for oil tracts. Wcvcrbergh's mca*blre of contract size in this case was the value lowest bid. The criticisll') of this is that the lowest bid varia blc itself.. rather thc constant term needed as a contract daturn
Anothcr approach suggested by Skitmorc ( 1 982) overconrs the ratio and datum proble•.'Ä by taking thc difference bctwecn logarithmic values ol' bids of individual as the obscrvational jncasure. This would sceno to lead to cstimalcs cr scai(-.t and relativc location parmnctcrs for each bidder bul leaving thc shape param.etcrs an unknown quantity.
"l'his paper describes thc developmcnt of thcse ideaq into a morc explicit treatment of the subject area by an examination of sonic potential models of bids, thc proposition ol' a new method of determining the conti-act datum. estimation of thc necessary parameters and, finally, the application of so-n'i'Z empirical tests to the biddcr assumption iinplied by prcvious research.
Three separate sets of bidding data %.vere obtained, referred to here as cases I .
data were donated by a construction comnany operating in the I_.ondon area. The covered all the cornpany's building contract bidding activities dUfing a 1 2-W10iith iü thc earlv 19803 {or a total of 86 contracts. Details of the type of projects were available but not uscd in the analysis. SOInc of thc dala werc incoinpicte. i n . the value of some bids or the identitv of bidders were not known by the company. In several cases. it was possible to supplement these dala from the case 3 source. [he resulting number of contracts for which a full set of bids, together with thc identity oflhe bidder, werc availa ble for ana %ysis totalle(.i 5 1 A total of 93 bidders entered 31 8 bids-
Casc 2 data were donated by a North of England County Council for building contract bids over approximately 4 years prior to I l-Ely 1982. l)ctails of 258 contracts pcovided in a precoded format. In some ca ses. the codes were iiiissing or no tenders had beta rzce.lvec othcr cases the codes or bids were iilegiblc. 'f'he rcsulting nuli]bcr of contracts for w h ich a fl.' I l set of bids. together \.vith the identity of the bidder, were available for analysis totalled 2 1 8. A total of 1 87 bidders entered 12.35 bids.
Case 3 data were obtained from the records of a bidding  agency in the I ,ondon area. The agency held details of most bids for most biddinp contracts in the London kii-ea in card form. A period of I week was spent copying a sample of contracts data for the November 1976 to February 1977. j"hc bids and associated bidders' names wcre recorded and the narnes later encoded for analysis. 'l'he resuhing, numbcr of contracts for which a filli set of bids, together with the identity ofthc bidders, were available for analysis totalled 373. A total of 356 bidders entercd 1915 bids.
Full details of all the case data are available from the author, subject to the approval of the source holders.

An obvious specific model for contract bidding is:
yvhere .Xii is bidder i's bid (i = 1 2 . r) for  l , 2, . . c), andfij( ), and are the various shape, location and scale parameters respectively. Thus each bid is conceived as being drawn from a probability distribution unique to each bidder for each contract. The difficulty with this model is, of course, that it is impossible to provide empirical estimates of each of the parametcrs fij( ), and with effectively only one xoj observation available. Clearly, for sufficient data to be available, some form of generalized model is necessary. Nine possibilities for generalization exist for this model:
(a) Shape generalization (i) by contracts:
(iii) by both contracts and bidders:
(b) Scale generalization (i) by contracts:
(iii) by both contracts and bidders:
(c) Location generalization (i) by contracts:
(iii) by both contracts and bidders:
he nat ure of construction contracts is SliCh tfiai tine a.s.*11rri L3tion of coinn-jon FL'.. . paramclcr. (c)(i ) and thus is inappropriatc generally (willi the exception of 19 7 4 Excha nges). a CCi ifll'yr • the casc oata considered iü the preser,i {he ot her nd. little ei-npirical or theoretical evidencc exists to corn radict that dist shape a nd spread is unaflOcted by a fiV characteristics iüdependeüil_s: of bidders.
In view of these considerations. I he airns of thc sludv 'to tcql a. Inodel for bidders) and (he limitations of the datil collected. it was propos,'G to test the coit-tsnon bidder coritdined in (a (b )(ii ) and l.
T ne first atternpt al this was to investigate the rcealive biddcr approach by which thc differenccs the  values bids are used inste; -ld of' the more popu\ar. bul suspect . ratio values This irapiies thc
. taking the nat urnl logs of the bids. the  •values art) taken to have been drawn a. probability disifibution with a constant shapc. f ( a uniq11C bidder va  and a Lifiiqnc bidder noean. (the stkbscyipt dots omitted frolii the 'ate-r analysis for notational ease).
To test the asst_lfnptions thal the bidder location paranfictcr.s .
and the bidder pa ratnctcrsil first necessary to te their values.
Paramct% estimation: ative bidd.%
Consider eiiiered bidder I (l r: I i ) for con t l"'dct j: •., assu•ninp. bids are c.st\inates of the paratncte.»s and in ( l ) Ina y be obtaincd from:
by solving the t y, o sets ot cqualio•ns:


= 1 when bidders i and I both enter bids for contract j,
0 otherwise
Iff( ) is normally distributed, N( ), the problem can, theoretically, be solved by the standard regression procedure as follows.
which is indexed by:
Then, letting
Xkij= 1 when the event indexed by k occurs, which includes the lower numbered bidder i, on contract j, and kij¯ — 1 when the event indexed by k occurs, which includes the higher numbered bidder i, on contract j, otherwise
and Zkj is the difference in bids between the two bidders when event k occurs on contract j, the normal equations are:
Estimates of E[YI], E[Y2],
3 m3c 			 + brXmrc	mc  will therefore be provided by the vector:


And the variance of bl is estimated by:

and N is the total number of paired observations.
The major difficulty with this approach is in the sparseness of the matrix system. In each row in equation (4) there are r—2 empty cells. Afifi and Elashoff (1966) have reviewed the literature on the problem of handling multivariate data with observations missing for some or all of the variables under study, noting that the estimation problems can often be simplified if the missing data follow certain patterns. Hocking and Smith (1968) have used estimates of parameters from one part of a (multivariate normal) data structure to insert into the other parts prior to using an iterative procedure. Elman (1982) has considered the use of direct and iterative methods of solving large sparse non-symmetric systems of linear equations finding diffculties with direct methods due to the factoring process generating many more non-zeros than the coeffcient matrix, thereby increasing the computational storage size needed. A further problem encountered was that the number of arithmetic operations could become excessive. His general conclusion was that ' . although progress has been made in the development of orderings for the unknowns that decrease the complexity of directness for solving sparse problems . . many large sparse problems cannot be solved by direct methods on present day computers'.
Some early tests on the data using matrix methods confirmed Elman's view that direct methods were unsuitable. The extreme sparseness of the data under study, in the proportion cr to c(r — 2), produced results severely distorted by computational rounding errors. It was, therefore, considered that an iterative procedure would be more appropriate.
The iterative procedure
A contract datum parameter was introduced into the model (1) resulting in the revised model:
where oq is a bidder location parameter, 13j is a contract datum parameter and + ßj— For the purposes of parameter estimation, this requires the solution of:
where isf(o, Oi2 ). [It was noted that Yij— 'i — + Gil, where and that, although appropriate for differences, equation (6) was preferred as less information is lost.]
Assumingf(o, 	is N(o, of):
The MLL over is, ß's and 	is
The procedure used was to initialize all and iterate equations (7) and (8) to convergence. The estimates of were adjusted for bias by the approximation:
where N 	ni, the total number of observations.
For computational purposes, it is unnecessary to introduce once only bidders, ni —— 1, until
after convergence of the iteration procedure. Convergence was taken to have occurred when the largest change in estimated value of any in consecutive iterations was less than % , where ea is small (an appropriate value of ea was found, after various trials, to be 10 7 ). A sample of the estimated values of [3j, and obtained by this iterative method for case I data is given in Table 1.
Sample of predictions from iterative procedure for case I

No. of bids (ni)
Having now reached the point where estimates of the bidders' scale parameters' and location parameters were available subject to the assumption that the shape parameterf( ) is normally distributed N( ), we were now in a position to start testing the bidder shape, scale and location generalizing assumptions described earlier by inspection of the residuals from the iterative procedure.
Following the procedure adopted in most other previous studies of bidding data, the next step taken was to examine the pooled residuals in order to gain some impression of the overall distribution shape and the validity of the normal model prior to testing the common bidder shape assumptionf( ). The results of this analysis are described in the next section.
Distribution of pooled residuals

Figures 1—3 show the frequency distribution of the pooled residuals  for each of the three cases. Visual inspection of the shapes of these frequency distributions suggested that the Normal distribution may be an appropriate model in all cases. The cumulative probability plots (Figs 4—6), however, provide evidence to the contrary, the data being rather heavy-tailed. Superimposition of Normal curves on the histograms (Figs 1—3) illustrates the position.
Distribution of residuals.
The plots do seem to indicate that the distribution of residuals may be similar for each case, however. This was tested by comparing the frequency distribution of residuals for each case with the frequency distribution of the pooled residuals for all cases. On the assumption that the pooled residuals represent the universal population of residuals, a chi-square test was applied to test the hypothesis that the standardized residuals for each case were samples from the same universal population. The results of this test indicated that the hypothesis should not be rejected, chi-square values of 2.9 (8 d.f.), 3.6 (10 d.f.) and 4.0 (14 d.f.) being recorded for cases l, 2 and 3 respectively.
Having concluded that the distribution of the (standardized) residuals could be considered to be the same for all cases, the residuals were pooled and some tests applied to determine the shape of this distribution.
As mentioned above, a visual inspection of the frequency distribution of the pooled residuals suggested the Normal model to be a possible approximation. On attempting to fit a Normal distribution of zero mean and unity variance, it was immediately apparent that a smaller
Distribution of residuals.
Distribution of residuals.
variance would provide a better visual fit. Several variances were, therefore, attempted (Fig. 7). Plots of Normal order statistics against the frequency of the pooled residuals were made. Figure 8 shows the plot against N(O, 1) and Fig. 9 against N(O, 0.6). This visual inspection suggested the N(O, 0.6) model to be the best approximation. This visual fit was not
Probability plot of residuals.
Probability plot of residuals.
confirmed, however, by the chi-square and Kolmogorov-Smirnov goodness of fit tests (Table 2).
As the critical values at the 5% significance level are Z(23) < 35.17 and D<0.024, none of the Normal distributions attempted werejudged to be ofa sufficiently good fit. The results for 02 = 1.0 are, ofcourse, not surprising, as 02 = 1.0 is the best estimate for standardized values.
The visual closeness of the distribution of the pooled residuals to a Normal distribution suggested that some function of the Normal distribution would be the best approach. Pearson's distributions were first consulted to check the possibility that a relatively simple unique function may suffice.
Pearson's distributions
The criterion k was calculated from the formula
andfound to be between zeroand unity, suggestingthe Type-IV distributionmay be the most appropriate. However, as the Type-IV distribution requires repeated numerical integration ofthe pdfin its application, it was decided that a computationally more effcient distribution should be adopted. One distribution ofthis type is the Gram-Charlier Type A series or the Edgeworth expansion.
Distribution of pooled residuals.
Expected Normal order statistic
Plot of Normal order statistics N(O, 1) against the frequency of the standardized pooled residuals.
Expected Normal order statistic
Plot of Normal order statistics N(O, 0.6) against the frequency of the standardized pooled residuals.
Goodness of fit tests for various Normal distributions to the standardized pooled residuals
Gram-Charlier Type A series and Edgeworth'sjbrm
Kendall and Stuart (1963, p. 162) note that the Type A series can encounter diffculties when more than the first four cumulants are included, unless the skewness coemcient (ßl ) is 'close enough' to zero. A coemcient of lßll 20.25 will produce a non-unimodal distribution with Edgeworth's form. Similarly, 1/321 20.50 produces negative frequencies. The Gram-Charlier series has a wider range of acceptability, but certainly non-unimodal if lßll 20.7.
As the skewness coeffcient of the pooled residuals was 0.057, it was considered that both Gram-Charlier and Edgeworth's forms would be appropriate for more than the fourth cumulant. Both the Gram-Charlier and Edgeworth forms being effectively the same, the Gram-Charlier Type A series was chosen to model the residuals.
The first four terms of the Gram-Charlier Type A series give a Cdf as follows:
where x is standardized. The population moments and g4 were estimated from the data as 0.16 and 6.03 respectively.
After a series of trials, it was found that a value of 4.5 for the fourth moment produced a more satisfactory fit (Fig. 10). Tests of goodness of fit resulted in 2 -32.7 — and Kolmogorov's D=0.012, the data not being significantly different from the theoretical distribution (at 5% significance). A casewise check was made to establish that the model was appropriate in all cases, by fitting the model to the standardized residuals of each of the three sets of residuals (Figs 11—13). Table 3 provides the results of the goodness of fit tests.
Gram-Charlier Type A series: Goodness of fit tests
Distribution of residuals 1.
Distribution of residuals 2.
As a final check, a simulation exercise was conducted in which random standardized values were generated for each bidder from a Gram-Charlier Type A distribution for 113=0.16 and g4 = 4.5. The chi-square and K-S tests both failed to reject the null hypothesis in each and every case. It was, therefore, concluded that the Gram-Charlier series with parameters = 0.16 and g 4 = 4.5 was a reasonable model of the standardized residuals.
Distribution of residuals 3.
Standardized values
Distribution of pooled residuals.
The discovery of high-peaked, heavy-tailed distributions is not a new phenomenon in empirical studies of data of these kind. Ali and Giacotto (1982), for instance, in their study of stock market prices, found that ' empirical distributions of price changes are usually high peaked with heavy tails when compared with the normal distribution'. Studies by Clark (1973) and Hsu et al. (1974) of similar data suggest that ' if the price changes are normal but not identically distributed, it is likely that the empirical distributions would be highly peaked and heavy tailed compared to the Normal distribution' (Ali and Giacotto, 1982, p. 19), the major differences being attributed to the existence of scale differences. Thus it is possible that individual price changes are really normally distributed but with different scale and location parameters, the pooling process obscuring the analysis.
On this evidence, therefore, it was clearly necessary to avoid this problem by examining the distribution of individual bidders' bids prior to pooling.
Distribution of individual bidders' bids
The aim of this analysis was to test the assumption that the shape of the distribution of bids entered by each bidder was the same for each bidder, having first removed the contract 'size' by the iterative procedure described above, but without pooling. In order to carry out this test, it was necessary to find a parametric shape that would reasonably model these distributions of bids. More formally, it is assumed that 'each of a set of observations {Xl, . . . , xn} is independently drawn from a density p(Xiß, o, Q), where g and c are location and scale parameters, and Q is a shape parameter that indexes a parametric family that contains the simplifying assumption as a special case QC)' (Spiegelhalter, 1983, p. 401).
In the present context, where there are several sets of observations (one set for each bidder) for each case, the notation = {z z is adopted and the density is p(zqilßi, q, Q) for the i th bidder (i = 1 r), where obtained after the iteration procedure. Thus the distribution shape under consideration is that of the values around for each i.
No global procedure appears to be available as yet by which estimates ofQ can be obtained from the data. It has been suggested that 'we can go a long way in the process of approximation if we make the distribution used have the correct values [estimated from the data] of its first four moments' (Pearson, 1963, p. 109). In determining Q, this implies the use of the third and fourth moments only and in particular the coemcients of skewness (Y1) and kurtosis (Y2), which are independent of any linear transformation of z. Two significant problems exist in this approach to these data in the absence of pooling. First, there are several sets of observations and therefore several estimates of Yl and Y2, that is Y11, Y12 , and Y Y . . , Y2r for each bidder. Secondly, each set of observations contains different, and few, values. It is clear, therefore, that some knowledge is needed of the distribution of small sample estimates of the standardized third and fourth moments of potential models. In addition, a procedure is also needed to combine the moments obtained from different sample sizes.
McCaffer and Pettitt (1976), in testing the distribution of contract bids for normality against uniformity, were able to overcome these problems by testing the uniformity of the distribution of the approximate probability of the Anderson-Darling A 2 statistic obtained for each contract. Although this method can clearly be extended to testing the validity of distributions other than normal and uniform, it does rely on the independence of the shape and scale parameters of the distribution being tested, a property not readily found in other distributions.
In view of these considerations, it was necessary to limit the tests to the bidder distributions most commonly proposed in the literature, the Normal (Alexander, 1970; Cauwelaert and Heynig, 1978; Emond, 1971; McCaffer, 1976; Mitchell, 1977; Morrison and Stevens, 1980) and Log-normal (Brown, 1974; Capen et al., 1971 ; Crawford, 1970; Klein, 1976; Pelto, 1971 ; Weverbergh, 1982; Wilson and Sharpe, 1988).
On the evidence of the statistical literature (Shapiro et al., 1968, for instance), it appears that the unpredictability of small sample test statistics, certainly for the almost symmetrical distributions anticipated with these data, precludes the selection of one particularly most powerful statistic to test the distributions under consideration. In the event, a battery of five different test statistics was used: (1) the sample coefficient of skewness, Yt ; (2) the sample coefficient of kurtosis, Y2 ; (3) Geary's (1935, 1936) 'a' statistic; (4) the sample studentized range, W/S; and (5) the Anderson-Darling A 2 statistic.
The exact small sample distribution of these five statistics is as yet unknown, and only Pettitt (1975), for the Anderson-Darling statistic, has obtained an adequate approximation. The necessary percentage points for the other four statistics were therefore estimated by a lengthy simulation procedure involving the computer generation of 20000 pseudo-random samples of size n =  for the Y2 statistic].
As it was expected that the distribution of Y'ij— bj around the estimated values would be modified by the estimation process, a simulation study of Log-normally distributed bids was conducted by generating appropriate values of from a N(gj, o; ) distribution, where and  were obtained from the known relationship for the Log-normal distribution (Aitchison and Brown, 1957):
being obtained from the raw data. The resulting simulated bids were then subjected to the iterative procedure, values for and computed and thence the values Zij= YiJ The Zij values were then subjected to the five shape tests, the probabilities of each of the resulting statistics tested for uniform distribution by the chi-square test, and the probability of the chi-square statistic obtained for the case. The process was repeated 1000 times for each case.
The critical values estimated from these simulations were found to be largely unaffected by the iterative procedure, the probabilities being very close to those expected.
Three classes of transformations of the data were made: (1 ) Yij= In(Xij— j), where fj is the sample mean of the bids; (2) = In(Xij— mxj), where xj is the value of the lowest bid; and (3) Yij=x l /p . Thus m=0 in transformations (l) and (2) tests the usual two-parameter Log-normal assumption, and p=0 in transformation (3) tests the Normal assumption.
Table 4 gives the results of the shape tests for all cases. The numbers in columns 24 indicate the tests which failed at the 5% significance level. As the table shows, only transformation (2) with 0.5 < m<0.9 produces a Normal distribution for all the three cases examined, indicating a three-parameter Log-normal distribution to be a satisfactory model throughout.
Having obtained, via the iterative procedure, estimates of the variance associated with each bidder, it was now proposed to test the homoscedascity assumption that each bidder has the
Results of tests of distribution shape for each bidder
same scale parameter, s 1 —  —s}. To examine the validity of the homoscedascity assumption with the data used in this study, Bartlett's test was applied to the Zij values obtained from the iterative procedure.
As with the shape tests, some problems were anticipated with presence of small sample sizes. The possibility also existed that the distribution of the Bartlett test statistic may be affected by the iterative procedure itself. A further simulation study was, therefore, conducted by generating Log-normal bid values for each bidder with an equal variance (estimated from the data). The iterative procedure was implemented and the probability of
Bartlett's statistic computed from the residuals Yij—ßj for each bidder. This was repeated 1000 times for cases 1 and 2, 100 times for case 3, due to the length of time for each trial (20 min for case 3). The values at the critical percentage points are shown in Table 5. The low values obtained for case 2 were unaccounted for but, as the same computer program was used for all cases, the values were accepted as being correct.
Simulated variance tests: Critical values of Bartlett's probability (simulation of log values obtained by iteration, average variance, Normal distribution)
Test statistics at
The results of the analysis of the actual case data are given in Table 6 for the various transformations employed earlier. As Table 6 shows, the homoscedascity assumption is not generally valid for cases 2 and 3.
It was now proposed to test the assumption that each bidder has the same location parameter
Ir. The approximation test chosen was the analysis of variance (ANOVA). The ANOVA relies on the assumption that the data are Normally distributed and the variances are equal, although the test is known to be robust, certainly as far as the Normal assumption is concerned (Kendall and Stuart, 1963, p. 465). The ANOVA, in this case, involves the test statistic

And F follows the F distribution with N — r —c + I and r — 2 degrees of freedom. An example for case 1 is given in Table 7.
The results obtained for the various transformations are provided in Table 8. Apart from the raw data for case 3 (which is considered to be highly non-Normal and heterogeneous
Results of tests for homoscedascity of bidders (Bartlett's test)
Transformation
ANOVA example for case 1

and, therefore, inappropriately tested by the F test), these results clearly indicate that the bidders cannot be modelled as bidding from a distribution with the same location parameter.
Transformation
Summary and conclusions
This paper describes an empirical analysis of three sets of data aimed at deriving a suitable basic statistical model to represent the behaviour of construction contract bidders. The assumption that, once contract size is eliminated, all bidders draw bids from an identical probability distribution, offers a convenient starting point for model building.
In designing a procedure to test this assumption, the first problem encountered is that the popular method of eliminating contract size, by taking the ratio of bids to some measure of contract size (mean bid, lowest bid, designer's estimate, etc.), presents rather extreme and generally unrecognized difficulties in the analysis and interpretation of results. In proposing a new model to overcome this problem, it is shown that parameter estimation essentially reduces to the standard regression procedure, but that the sparsity of the resulting matrix system produces results severely distorted by computational rounding errors. Having solved this second problem by including a contract size datum parameter and substituting an iterative procedure for the regression method, the required scale and location parameters for individual bidders were successfully estimated on the assumption of a common Normal distribution.
Following previous contract-based analyses, the pooled residuals were then examined for compliance with the Normal assumption. This assumption was not found to be appropriate, the distributions for all three data sets each being similarly heavy-tailed corresponding to the Gram-Charlier Type A distribution = 0.16 and g4 = 4.5. Heavy-tailed empirical distributions of these kind are, however, known to occur when samples of common shape but different scale parameters are pooled. In overcoming this final problem, the analysis of the unpooled residuals, a method similar to McCaffer and Pettitt's (1976) analysis of the distribution of contract bids, was used by testing the uniformity of the distribution of the approximate probability of each of five shape test statistics obtained for each bidder. By recording the test fails over a variety of log and power transformations, it was established that a three-parameter Log-normal model (equivalent to the transformation Yij In(Xij— mxj) for 0.5 < m < 0.9 to Normality, where xj is the lowest bid for the contract) was appropriate for all three data sets.
Finally, the application of Bartlett's test and analysis of variance to the data indicated that both the common variance and common means assumption are generally invalid.
The general conclusions of this research are that the same three-parameter Log-normal distribution within the range specified above may be reasonably used to model the behaviour of all the bidders for these data. Estimates of the scale and location parameters, however, must be made separately for each bidder, the iterative method described in this paper providing the necessary technique for the task.
Acknowledgements
The author is indebted to Mr Roy Thomas of the Department of Civil Engineering and Drs Ernest Wilde and Mike Patefield of the Department of Mathematics, University of Salford, for their kind assistance in this research.
