Digital Twin and Web-Based Virtual Gaming
Technologies for Online Education:
Construction Management and Engineering
Faculty of Built Environment, University of New South Wales Sydney, Sydney 2052, Australia;
Sepas@unsw.edu.au or samad.sepasgozar@gmail.com
8 June 2020; 3 July 2020; 7 July 2020
Mixed reality is advancing exponentially in some innovative industries, including manufacturing and aerospace. However, advanced applications of these technologies in architecture, engineering, and construction (AEC) businesses remain nascent. While it is in demand, the use of these technologies in developing the AEC digital pedagogy and for improving professional competence have received little attention. This paper presents a set of five novel digital technologies utilising virtual and augmented reality and digital twin, which adds value to the literature by showing their usefulness in the delivery of construction courses. The project involved designing, developing, and implementing a construction augmented reality (AR), including Piling AR (PAR) and a virtual tunnel boring machine (VTBM) module. The PAR is a smartphone module that presents different elements of a building structure, the footing system, and required equipment for footing construction. VTBM is developed as a multiplayer and avatar-included module for experiencing mechanisms of a tunnel boring machine. The novelty of this project is that it developed innovative immersive construction modules, practices of implementing digital pedagogy, and presenting the capacity of virtual technologies for education. This paper is also highly valuable to educators since it shows how a set of simple to complex technologies can be used for teaching various courses from a distance, either in emergencies such as corona virus disease (COVID-19) or as a part of regular teaching. This paper is a step forward to designing future practices full of virtual education appropriate to the new generation of digitally savvy students.
virtual reality; augmented reality; digital twin; 360 modules; online App; construction; digital pedagogy; e-learning; risk management
Introduction
Visiting a real construction site is not always possible due to site restrictions, the limited number of students permitted to enter a site, and, more recently, due to COVID-19. Virtual modules can be used for online education in architecture, engineering, and construction (AEC). They can also be applied to formative learning, flipped classroom [1], blended experimental teaching [2], and online teaching modes [3]. Previous studies investigated the feasibility of using virtual technology in education in different contexts, such as healthcare [4]. Recent studies intend to use virtual technology for education in construction and architecture such as Bashabsheh et al. [5], Wang et al. [6], Eiris Pereira and Gheisari [7], and Gao et al. [8]. However, the application of virtual technologies to show real physical practices in an immersive environment without using headsets for AEC education purposes has not been thoroughly investigated. There are complicated processes in construction, such as drilling and boring underground, which students have not experienced before, and traditional learning methods such as textbooks cannot easily deliver the knowledge. In contrast to text-based learning materials,
there is a possibility of practicing in a simulated environment that allows students for correction and repetition to improve their skills with non-risk failures [9]. The purpose of this study is to present novel tools and online virtual applications to present the complicated processes of drilling, piling, and boring and an excavator digital twin to AEC students. The digital twin refers to the digital replica of a physical entity utilising the internet of things enabling two-way communications between them. The excavator digital twin and other education apps also address the deficiencies of traditional approaches in terms of promoting the engaging capabilities that allow students to be fully immersed in virtual space [6,10,11]. The purpose of these virtual apps is to enable large scale site visits, that will enable students to enter a virtual environment and learn a building case study or heavy equipment. The AEC courses may use project-based learning (PBL) approaches [12], so students are required to enhance their cooperation and collaboration skills [13]. Also, group project learning is recommended to all other educational disciplines at universities [14]. However, several severe challenges of PBL have not been adequately addressed for large classrooms. For example, the way instructors can measure each group member’s contribution to their group assignment and give them immediate feedback in large classes will be much more difficult when it comes to the implementation of flipped learning methods or formative learning approaches.
(1) How can mixed reality and digital twins be applied in construction education?
(2) What virtual and augmented reality modules can provide a collaborative environment, and what factors may enhance students’ engagement in construction education?
(3) What are the key values and advantages of the selected technologies in construction?
Significance and Advantages of Virtual Technology
The significance of virtual technologies is that it helps users to have an active experience rather than a passive learning experience and enhances their creativity [15,16]. Emerging technologies and virtual tools have caused a significant change in education methods, including construction education [17]. They shifted education and professional practices significantly away from the traditional individual theory-based lecturing to group PBL, similar to other practical disciplines. Project-based learning refers to learning from a specific construction project as a case study. Examples of group-based learning methods in engineering are problem-solving with open-ended solutions [18,19], hands-on projects [20], and team-oriented communications [21]. More recently, the concept of active learning and student engagement has had a significant impact on education design in practical courses [22], arguing that students learn more and are more prepared for their careers by actively applying the course materials. Some researchers recommended flipped classroom models for construction management [1,23]. However, this new highly lauded method has not yet received enough attention in the AEC, including the construction management discipline, particularly for large classrooms [1,24,25]. Also, there are not enough digital tools to support this teaching method. The problem is that the educator cannot take a large class of students into a construction site. This is particularly an important problem where a specific activity such as piling is not at the same time as the teaching period.
PBL is recommended to many educational disciplines at universities [14]. The PBL assessment is the core concern of many studies in different fields, including AEC, and students need to work collaboratively and enhance their social and cooperation skills. Table 1 presents the positive and negative experiences of students in doing PBL based on the literature.

Overall advantages, experience, and barriers to group project assessments.
