A survey of constraints on Iranian construction operatives' productivity
To cite this article: Mahmood Zakeri , Paul O. Olomolaiye , Gary D. Holt & Frank C. Harris
(1996) A survey of constraints on Iranian construction operatives' productivity, Construction
To link to this article:
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
Construction Management and Economics (1996) 14, 417± 426
A survey of constraints on Iranian construction operatives’ productivity
Received 11 May 1995; accepted 24 February 1996
Construction productivity is rarely analysed in Iran. If productivity is to improve, current weaknesses must be identi® ed. To this end data were collected through a structured questionnaire survey. By utilizing the relative index ranking technique, the identi® ed problems were prioritized for detailed analysis and discussion. Results indicate that the ® ve highest-ranking problems are: Materials shortage, weather and site conditions, equipment breakdown, drawing de® ciencies/change orders, and lack of proper tools and equipment. Devastating war with neighbouring Iraq has led to a boom in construction activities leading to shortages of construction materials. The casual employment of the majority of construction operatives and poor managerial skills are the signi® cant contributors to low productivity on Iranian construction sites.
Productivity, site operations, Iran.
Introduction
Construction is more important in developing countries than it is in developed countries (Altaf, 1979). The construction sector in Iran constitutes 10.9% of the total workforce (Iran Central Census, 1990) and contributes more than 8% of the GNP (MRU, 1994). As in many other developing countries, the construction industry in Iran suffers from poor productivity and increasing construction costs. A surge in construction activities is a consequence of, among other things:
1. the 1979 Islamic revolution, with its populist policies, including mass housing, electricity and water supply projects;
2. eight years of devastating war with neighbouring Iraq (1980± 88);
3. population growth, including mass migration from neighbouring Afghanistan.
These, combined with the refurbishment or reconstruction of old buildings1 and major infrastructure projects for the oil, petrochemical and gas industries, have jointly led to a boom in construction demand and shortages of construction materials. The shortages have been further compounded by seemingly uncontrollable hyper-in¯ ation in the Iranian economy. There is a paucity of investigations on construction productivity and management techniques in Iran, but going by the example of other countries it can be assumed that any effort directed to improving productivity will greatly enhance the country’s chances of realizing her development goals. This paper reports an investigation aimed at identifying constraints on construction operatives’ productivity in Iran. The rationale of the paper is that productivity cannot be improved without ® rst identifying fundamental weaknesses in existing practices.
Data for the study were collected via a structured questionnaire survey of 355 construction operatives on 31 sites in Iran. The questionnaire consisted of six sections and a total of 49 questions, covering a number of productivity-related factors. Such factors were identi® ed from previous studies (Borcherding, 1976; Mackenzie and Harris 1984; Sikkeland and Erkelens, 1984; Sanders and Thomas, 1991). Arrangements to contact operatives were made through of® cials in the Iran Ministry of Residence and Urbanization (MRU) for government housing projects in Tehran and neighbouring cities, and through directors of private construction companies. These of® cials requested aims and potential bene® ts of the investigations to the industry and companies before granting permission to contact the operatives through their supervisors. The supervisors subsequently granted direct contacts to the operatives, who were, in turn, asked to complete the questionnaires and return them directly to the ® rst author. While bias cannot be totally eliminated, the operatives were assured that responses would have no effect on their employment. In the booming Iranian construction industry it can safely be said that no skilled worker need fear any employer as they can easily ® nd work on a nearby site! One hundred and seventy two operatives out of 335, i.e. 51.3% of the total sample, returned the questionnaire, of which 141 (i.e. 42.1%) were duly completed and form the basis of the analysis reported in this paper.
Personal characteristics of respondents
As variation in personality is one of the main factors in human motivation and productivity (Olomolaiye, 1988), it was considered logical to evaluate the personality of the operatives. This was done with regards to age, experience, training, mode of employment, and overall attitude towards employers with respect to length of employment.
As Table 1 indicates, the majority of the construction workforce surveyed were young operatives, the modal
Construction works

Public building
Industrial and civil engineering
Commercial building
Table 3	Operatives’ working experience
nstruction working e


age group being 20± 30 years. This is probably due to the manual nature of construction work in Iran; speci® cally, the requirement for carrying heavy concrete or operating heavy machines. Among those trades requiring a greater degree of skill (e.g. joinery and masonry), the data suggest a tendency towards older workers. This may be related to the length of training period required for such skill acquisition.
Table 2 lists operatives’ work experience. With almost 83% of operatives having more than ® ve years of construction experience, it can be safely assumed that the operatives surveyed were generally conversant with the problems of their trades. For clari® cation of respondent working experience, relevant to the major construction activities undertaken in the country, they were requested to classify their working experience according to type of jobs executed (see Table 3). By utilizing the relative index ranking technique (Holt, et al., 1994), workers were found to have greatest experience on housing projects, as re¯ ected by the relative importance index of 0.86 ascribed to housing. This is a function of eight years of war and a fast-growing population, leading the government to plan for the construction of 1 500 000 new houses in the 1993± 98 period (MRU, 1994b). Public building, with a relative importance of 0.73, is ranked highly in second place. Civil and industrial engineering projects usually have their own special type of workforce, requiring a high level of skill and expertise. On these types of project, conditions of employment are often better; advanced tools and equipment are more in evidence; good management (supervision and control) and job security, are also more prominent. Facilities such as canteens, accommodation, transport and allowances are not usually available to operatives on housing or public works, but feature strongly on civil engineering projects.
Education and training
The construction workforce in Iran generally has low levels of literacy. The 1986 Census indicates the following characteristics of construction workers:
2. 59.5% have elementary schooling;
3. 15.6% primary high school (3 years);
4. 10.9% secondary high school (3 years);
5. 2.7% higher education (degree and above);
The World Bank Staff Working Paper (World Bank, 1973) indicated that the Iranian government in many respects has failed in manpower planning and education to cater effectively for the requirements of the construction industry. The industry has usually had to train its own skilled labour, and has often suffered critical manpower shortages, particularly at the subprofessional level. This problem has frequently been aggravated by government delaying payments. Our survey indicates that more than 95% of the workers have been trained through apprenticeship and on-job training (Table 4). Technical schools add relatively little to the available pool of skilled labour. However, some companies working on specialized contracts (such as gas pipeline projects, petrochemicals, oil ® eld projects and power stations) have special training programmes, which typically utilize guarantee bonds obliging the operatives to work for a minimum period of time for their sponsors. Institution-based training is not yet common practice in Iran, and hence there are no nationally recognized certi® cates for construction
Table 4	How operatives were trained
Training method
(a) Apprenticeship
(b) Technical school
Combination (a) and (b)
On-site training
Mode of employment
Individual subcontractor/ daily pay
comparable to the UK’s City and Guilds or NVQs. Often operatives commence work in the industry by being apprenticed to some skilled/experienced worker until the employer begins to entrust them with work independently. It may take two to four years before this recognition is attained by aspiring tradesmen.
Mode of employment
Operatives involved in construction are often from rural areas, and not permanently employed in construction. This does not necessarily imply that they are not in full-time work. Typically at harvest time workers leave their construction jobs only to return after planting. Table 5 shows operatives’ mode of employment, and apart from full-time construction operatives, casual labour (mostly farmers) constitutes 26% of the work force. These operatives exhibit high rates of absenteeism and/or turnover, causing disruption to the progress of construction projects. However, Afghan refugee workers have alleviated the problem to some extent. Daily-paid operatives, who constitute 25% of the work force, are available from an operatives’ pool, and typically earn higher wage rates, but have little job security or additional allowances.
Length of employment and attitudes
Table 6 indicates that most workers rarely spend more than 3 years with any particular employer. Conversely, Table 7 indicates that operatives’ knowledge, attitudes, ability, and experience at work, and attitudes towards
Table 6	Length of service with present employer
Number of operatives
Table 7	Operatives’ rating of working attitudes towards employer
Number of respondents
Satisfactory
an employer or manager, are generally satisfactory, suggesting a relationship between length of employment and conducive working environments. Perhaps the question is not one of loyalty but more a re¯ ection of the duration of construction projects, which rarely exceed one year. It would seem that operatives are given chances on each new contract of employment (with new agreed terms and conditions) to realize job expectations. Site managers utilize the effort and energy of this new, enthusiastic and well-motivated workforce to achieve higher-quality work.
Operatives and main productivity problems
Various internal and external factors affect operative productivity. Some common factors were selected from a literature review of productivity studies, and operatives were asked to identify those constituting problems on their projects, and give estimates of time losses per week, per problem area. Subsequent utilization of the relative importance ranking technique helped to identify the ranking of the factors (see Table 8). For the purposes of this discussion we shall consider/analyse the ten most important ranked constraints.
Lack of materials
Table 8 Causes of poor productivity and hours loss per week per operative
Relative HLa
Lack of materials
Weather and site condition
Lack of proper tools and equipment
Improper plan of work
Repeating work
Changing crew size/ turnover
Interference at work
Poor communication and MIS
aHL=hours loss per operative per week.
With a relative index of 0.44, lack of materials emerged as the most crucial on-site problem. As project activities are often interdependent, there could be unquanti® able levels of disruption in other activities, such as formwork or scaffolding, if materials are not available. Materials shortages can be traced mainly to
increased construction demand due to the reconstruction programme, including factories, bridges, power stations, oil re® neries, petrochemical plants, houses and other infrastructure, since the end of hostilities. Complicating the shortage problem further is the apparent lack of any speci® c government policy on materials procurement and distribution in this very important sector of the economy. It is not disputed that a shortage of materials affects on-site productivity, but the problem is often compounded by outright unavailability. While management may have no alternative than to pay higher prices for those materials available on the market, little can be achieved when materials are simply not available. Operatives were therefore asked to indicate the common causes of non-availability on their sites, on the premiss that if the causes are known some solution may be proffered.
Causes of non-availability of materials
Ineffective material management leads to inef® cient use of craft labour (Thomas, 1989). The main reasons that respondents cited for non-availability of materials are detailed in Table 9. The factor with the greatest impact was negligence and sabotage. Owing to a shortage of cement bags, cement is often taken to site loosely by truck. Most sites do not have silos or proper cement storage: therefore cement is often kept in a pit or temporarily between loose bricks covered with polythene sheets. Sometimes during transportation cement is not securely covered, resulting in high wastage. Though sheer negligence and probable sabotage were cited by some operatives, who are not satis® ed with their pay level or management treatment, the problem is actually nothing but poor transport facilities. In two sites the author detected that operatives were transporting materials with punctured wheelbarrows.

Relative Ranking

Improper material handling on site
Lack of proper plan of work to be done
Excessive paperwork for materials requisition
Table 9	Main causes of non-availability of materials on site
most concrete and steel structural frames with joist and block ¯ oors, it is common that the joists and concrete or brick blocks are transported ¯ oor to ¯ oor manually or by very simple and unsafe rope and spool, and each time a percentage of the transferred materials is damaged or wasted entirely.
The second major cause relates to on-site transport dif® culties, with a relative index of 0.68. Congested working space and/or improperly deposited material generally make movement and manoeuvrability very dif® cult. Improper material handling on site ranked third. While some large companies use highly advanced handling equipment, the majority of contractors have only very simple and ineffective handling methods. Inef® ciency is not limited to wastage, but could also be related to poor safety measures.
Improper material usage or application to the speci® cation ranked fourth, with a relative index of 0.64. Materials are misused for many reasons, including contractor dishonesty (using inferior materials to those speci® ed), poor workmanship, poor instruction and poor supervision. Lack of proper plan of work, with a relative index of 0.47, ranked ® fth. An improper plan of work or ineffective preplanning effort on the part of site managers or general foremen usually leads to confusion and delay, or utilization of materials in noncritical activities. This is particularly important in Iran, with increasing demand for construction materials and scarcity in the market. Improper material deliveries, with a relative index of 0.43, is ranked sixth, and occurs as a result of unavailability of material in the market or deliberate dishonesty in using cheaper materials. Rejection of delivered materials to site by project superintendents (due to non-conformance with speci® cations) results in much disruption to the working process, delay and loss. Such problems are not uncommon, especially on complex projects utilizing materials and equipment from abroad. Excessive paperwork procedure for materials requisition was the lowest-ranked cause, cited by some operatives working on large sites.
Weather and physical site conditions
Respondents ranked this problem second, with a relative index of 0.34. Every year, excessive rainfall and adverse weather conditions cause considerable ® nancial loss to many Iranian construction projects and contractors in particular. This loss, however, directly affects those operatives who are not on a regular payroll. The average hour loss per operatives per week in this regard is 4.6%, which compared with Clapp’s (1966) study of ® ve English housing sites each of between 50 and 120 houses, between 1953 and 1956, is three times more. The National Electrical Contractors Association’s (1974) general ® ndings’ that 100% productivity can only be achieved when temperature is between 5ë C and 25ë C and relative humidity is below 80% can be suitable guidance for scheduling operatives performance with regard to the site location. Harris and McCaffer (1975) developed a model that allowed the determination of the additional costs that arise due to bad weather. Applying this model in contract documents, particularly on large contracts, may also save Iranian contractors from undue loss of productivity as a consequence of adverse weather conditions.
Lack of proper tools and equipment
Productivity is dependent upon an ef® cient application of tools and equipment. However, a lack of proper tools and equipment can have a critical effect. With 4.6% hour loss per operative per week, this factor ranked as the ® fth major problem on Iranian construction sites (see Table 8). Old and obsolete construction equipment, shortage of spare parts, improper service and maintenance, slack use of machinery or intentional sabotage by operators (who are not happy with company policy, its management or level of earnings) are some of the causes of this problem leading to delays (of weeks in some instances). This was further aggravated during hostilities, as some construction equipment served as ready spare parts for the war effort. With increasing change in project size and complexity, and the development of new technology, construction is constantly exposed to changing methods, tools and equipment. A general consensus of opinion from this survey showed that replacing old and outdated machinery would almost certainly enhance productivity.
Commonly reported problems for productivity in Iran were:
1. errors in design and poor constructability of designs;
2. non-conformance (contradictions) in the architectural, structural, mechanical and electrical engineering drawings;
3. contract document speci® cations con¯ icting with drawing speci® cations;
4. too many revision and change orders.
This factor, with a relative importance index of 0.30 and 4.1% hour loss per operative per week, ranked as the fourth problem overall. These problems were high among two developers and a few contractors utilizing different specialists in the design process. Revisions and change orders lengthen construction time, and may allow pro® ts to the workforce or contractors. However, it is often rather frustrating to operatives when no progress is apparently being made or when completed work has to be demolished. The contractors themselves complain because project rhythm is disrupted, and expensive `overtime’ payments often have to be made.
Inspection delays
This factor was ranked sixth: see Table 8. Responses indicate that most sites do not have a resident superintendent or an agent, and where they do he rarely has full authority, experience or knowledge of the job in hand to make effective decisions promptly. Sometimes many days are needed for even simple decisions to be taken. Also, a negative attitude on the part of site agents towards operatives and subcontractors disrupts work in progress, resulting in time and resource wastage. Similarly, lack of cooperation between contractors and client representatives (e.g. project architects) results in delays, especially on public projects. Complexity and sensitivity of projects, particularly in the oil-® eld area, may cause long and costly delays.
With a relative index of 0.29 and 3.9% hour loss of site productivity per operative per week, absenteeism ranked seventh (Table 8). The Business Round Table (1982), in an assessment of the economic impact of absenteeism on labour cost, by assembling a team of experts established that each 1% increase in absenteeism causes an increase in labour cost of 1.5%. The absenteeism rate in Iran, though, is less than the minimum reported by the Business Round Table (5± 15%). The present in¯ ationary situation of the country, with an increasing need for economic ef® ciency, could have a considerable destructive effect on operatives’ productivity. Reasons for absenteeism range from unavoidable absence (due to ill health etc.) to deliberate absence (e.g. searching or working on more lucrative jobs elsewhere).
Construction work is naturally accident prone. Improvements can be of great bene® t to the physical well-being of operatives, to morale, and to the progress of the work generally (Davies, 1986): hence effective safety and health programmes are desirable. Surprisingly, this factor was ranked only eighth by operatives, with a relative index of 0.28. Hinze and Parker (1978) showed that good safety performance and high productivity occur together. Unsafe activities are the result of such things as worker negligence, carelessness, ignorance, and mostly lack of attention by contractors to providing the required safety equipment for operatives. Contractors in this survey recorded six deaths on four projects resulting from various breaches of safety regulations. This has not only caused contractors considerable ® nancial loss in direct compensation (to the operatives’ families and to the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs for breach of safety), but has also resulted in project delay and cost overrun.
Improper plan of work
With a relative index of 0.28, this factor is ranked ninth (Table 8). Clearly, the major bene® t of planning occurs not when things go as planned, but when the unexpected happens (Tucker, 1986). Poor knowledge and the inexperience of project managers in planning, scheduling, and the procurement process help to explain poor operative productivity. With such a huge socio-economic crisis in Iran, causing constantly increasing prices of all resources, non-availability of materials, and high irregularity in payments, planning can be very dif® cult. Even the best-planned projects in Iran soon require replanning, which is not always possible and often expensive. Of the operatives surveyed, 26% work on projects with no formal knowledge of work planning, 17% do not even know whether projects have a working plan or not!
Repeating work
This was the tenth operatives’ ranked productivity problem. Discontent with rework as a result of poor instruction, supervision, change orders, revision in drawings, etc. impacts negatively on operatives’ prod-
Table 10	Causes of repetition/rework on site
Revisions/change order

Complex drawings and speci® cation
Poor instruction and supervision
uctivity as well as their working morale and attitudes (Kahn and Katz 1965; Borcherding, 1972; Borcherding and Oglesby, 1975). The most signi® cant causes of reworks as reported by respondents are shown in Table 10. The greatest amount of rework is attributed to poor workmanship, which is a function of poor instruction, supervision and control. Recruiting lowwage, unskilled labour for projects requiring experience and expertise is the root cause, closely followed by operatives, negligence and sabotage. High rate of revision and change orders is the third-ranked cause (which may result from lack of speci® c construction material in the market, clients changing their mind, sloppy engineering design with incomplete drawings and/or errors, inconsistencies in the plans etc.), and this appears to create continuous dilemmas for craftsmen and supervisors on the site. Other causes of repetition, as seen in Table 10, may again be seen as managerial and supervisory obligations.
Changing crew size and labour turnover
New recruits require learning time, including familiarization with personnel, administrative procedures, working conditions, etc. The time lost is a direct expense to the contractor. The factor with 3.1% hour loss per operative per week ranked tenth. In an effort to ® nd out the rate of labour turnover, operatives were asked to state the number of operatives in their gang who had left the project since they were recruited (see Table 11).
They were also asked to suggest and rank the four most important reasons for labour turnover on their
Table 11	Rate of operatives’ turnover



project (see Table 12). It would seem that Iranian construction operatives change jobs primarily to increase their income. The rapid devaluation of the country’s currency, and inability of government to cope with economic crisis and a high in¯ ation rate, brought severe disruption to the whole industrial process; the resultant low level of pay has led to a continuous demand for higher pay. Although the minimum wage rate has recently been increased by 20% by the Ministry of Labour (Khaje Nouri, 1995) to 5333 Rials (£1.92) per day, this is still far from the amount needed for a decent standard of living!
The second most important cause is the casual nature of employing most of the work force. The majority of Iranian construction workers are from rural areas with seasonal ¯ uctuations in their availability (Iran Central Census, 1990). They are usually closely knit, working and living together, and so do not easily accept strangers within their groups. Though unpredictable, they demonstrate a good sense of responsibility, faithfulness and af® liation towards their employer and the job.
Remoteness of sites and family problems is the third
Low level of pay
Remote site and family problem
Discontinuity of work
Job opportunity
Hard working condition
Lack of working facilities
Lack of material at site
Table 12	Ranking of labour turnover factors
source of dissatisfaction and cause of labour turnover. Most large and developmental projects are located in remote and less developed areas, with poor access and insuf® cient facilities. Problems may accrue on the remote sites because contractors are usually not prepared to provide suitable canteen, accommodation and other recreation and transport facilities for their personnel, and usually labour turnover in such a project is very high.
Delays in payment of salary and allowances ranked fourth. The cause of such delays can be traced mainly to late payment of contractors by clients. This indirectly affects operatives’ attitudes and morale at work, and soon leads them to search for better paid jobs.
Impact of labour turnover on productivity
Correlation analysis of turnover factors (Table 12) to productivity on 25 sites under this survey indicates that management behaviour/treatment and remote sites and family problems are signi® cantly correlated with productivity directly and casual labour, job opportunity indirectly (see Table 13). Stepwise regression analysis of these factors against the productivity of the sites indicates that management behaviour accounts for 25% and remote sites and family problems account for 14% explanation of variation in the sites’ productivity.
The ® ve most problematic constraints to construction workers’ productivity in Iran have been found to be:
1. lack of materials;
2. weather and site condition;
Table 13	Correlation matrix of operatives’ turnover factors to site productivity
Productivity
Low level of pay
Job opportunity
Hard work. cond.
Lack of material
4. design de® ciency and/or change orders; 5.	lack of proper tools and equipment.
While materials shortages can be traced to the increase in construction demand since the war with Iraq ended, the government’s poor procurement and distribution policies have compounded the problem further. It would seem that construction workers’ problems are externally generated by the socio-economic crisis in the country. If the economic situation could be stabilized, workers’ problems would to some extent, be alleviated. However, effort would still need to be directed at training, and at improving the professionalism of the construction business as conducted by major participants in the industry. While Table 8 indicates an overall of 51% of hour loss per operatives per site per week, the activity sampling shows 24± 46% unproductive time variation on these sites. Stepwise regression analysis of turnover factors against productivity on these sites indicates that management behaviour/treatment and remote site with insuf® cient facilities together account for 39% of variation in the operatives’ productivity. In order to develop a strategy for removing the barriers to productivity in Iran, a comprehensive study of workers’ motivation is being conducted and will be reported in a future paper.
