Construction Economics
Construction Economics provides students with the principles and concepts underlying the relationship between economic theory and the construction industry. The new approach adopts an argument that economics is central to government initiatives concerning sustainable construction.
This edition has been revised to explain the effects of the current economic crisis on the construction industry. In addition, sections relating to less developed countries, the economics of sustainable development and theories relating to a firm’s bid strategy have all been rewritten. With new data, examples, initiatives, readings, glossary items and references, the third edition of this established core text builds on the strengths of the previous edition:
• a clear and user-friendly style
• use of a second colour to highlight important definitions and formulae
• regular summaries of key points
• a glossary of key terms
• extensive use of tables and figures
• extracts from the academic journal Construction Management and Economics to consolidate and prompt discussion
• reviews of useful websites.
This invaluable textbook is essential reading across a wide range of disciplines from construction management and civil engineering to architecture, property and surveying.
Danny Myers is a lecturer and researcher based in the Department of Construction and Property at the University of the West of England, UK, and visiting lecturer at the University of Bath, UK.
Construction Economics A new approach

Construction industry. 2. Construction industry—Management.
Typeset in Sabon by DSM Partnership

Although the book cover implies this is all my own work, it was not achieved alone. The staff and students that I have worked with have subtly, and not so subtly, made their mark. In particular, research undertaken with Kevin Burnside, a supportive colleague over a number of years, has helped to improve the clarity of the process of bidding for work in a construction industry dragged down by financial crisis and subsequent recession. The fruits of our discussion should be evident in Chapters 7 and 8.
Next, to bring life to a manuscript is no easy task and this would have been impossible without the graphic design skills, and patience, of Chris Wade, who has added some new artwork to this edition.
A major concern from the outset was to create a text that was easy to read and use. This is some challenge in the subject area, and again it has been a pleasure to be supported by the editing skills of Paul Stirner. His perceptive, informed and detailed line of enquiry has added greater clarity and rigour to the text, making the completed manuscript as accessible as possible.
Finally I should acknowledge the support of the publishers, in particular Brian Guerin who co-ordinates the team involved in commissioning a new edition and taking it through to publication, and you would be surprised at the number of departments that involves.
I hope you find the finished product interesting and relatively easy to use. If any errors or omissions remain, I apologise for these in advance, and would be grateful for correspondence bringing them to my attention. Enjoy the book!
This book is written for students from many backgrounds: architecture, surveying, civil engineering, mechanical engineering, structural engineering; construction, project or estate management, property development, conservation and, even, economics. Economics students may find it possible to skip over some of the standard analysis, but should be forewarned that in many ways construction is quite distinct from other sectors of the economy. An important aim of this text is to draw out these distinctions and clarify the unique nature of the industry. In this first chapter we begin to outline the main characteristics of firms involved in construction markets, introducing the complexity of the construction process and diversity of activities. As the chapter develops you will sense that there are a number of possible ways to describe the construction industry. Table 1.1 identifies a range of activities that can be included in a broad definition of the industry. By contrast, Table 1.2 (see page 11) divides the construction process into a number of professional stages and Table 1.3 (see page 19) outlines a simple classification system that narrowly defines the industry as firms that just construct and maintain buildings and infrastructure.
Table 1.1  The construction industry – broadly defined
The key actors include:
Suppliers of basic materials, e.g. cement and bricks
Manufacturers of building components, e.g. windows and doors
Project managers and surveyors who co-ordinate the overall assembly
Machinery manufacturers who provide equipment used on site, such as cranes and bulldozers
Site operatives who bring together components and materials
Developers and architects who initiate and design new projects
Facility managers who manage and maintain property
Providers of complementary goods and services such as transportation, distribution, demolition, disposal and clean-up
Adapted from Manseau and Seaden (2001:
The aim of the text is to demonstrate that underlying the construction process, from conception to demolition, is a lot of useful economics. As a discipline, economics should not be regarded as solely related to the appraisal of costs. The subject matter is far broader, and this text introduces a number of branches of economic theory. These have been selected to provide fresh insights into the performance of construction firms and a greater understanding of the need for a more holistic approach if the industry is to contribute to an efficient and sustainable economy in the future. These economic ideas should inform the work of all professionals concerned with the construction and maintenance of buildings and infrastructure – and, in particular, the way that they think.
The next section explains some of the key concepts used by economists. Further clarification is provided in the glossary at the back of the book, where all the economic terms highlighted in the text and other concepts and ideas relevant to construction economics are defined.
Construction economics – like pure economics, its mainstream equivalent – is concerned with the allocation of scarce resources. This is far more complex than it at first appears. Many of the world’s resources (factors of production such as land, labour, capital and enterprise) are finite, yet people have infinite wants. We are, therefore, faced with a two-pronged problem: at any point in time there is a fixed stock of resources, set against many wants. This problem is formally referred to as scarcity. In an attempt to reconcile this problem, economists argue that people must make careful choices – choices about what is made, how it is made and for whom it is made; or in terms of construction, choices about what investments are made, how these are constructed and on whose behalf. Indeed, at its very simplest level, economics is ‘the science of choice’.
When a choice is made, therefore, some other thing that is also desired has to be forgone. In other words, in a world of scarcity, for every want that is satisfied, some other want, or wants, remain unsatisfied. Choosing one thing inevitably requires giving up something else. An opportunity has been missed or forgone. To highlight this dilemma, economists refer to the concept of opportunity cost. One definition of opportunity cost is:
the value of the alternative forgone by choosing a particular activity.
Once you have grasped this basic economic concept, you will begin to understand how economists think – how they think about children allocating their time between different games; governments determining what their budgets will be spent on; and construction firms deciding which projects to proceed with. In short, opportunity costs enable relative values to be placed on all employed resources.
This way of thinking emphasises that whenever an economic decision is made there is a trade-off between the use of one resource for one or more alternative uses. From an economic viewpoint the value of a trade-off is the ‘real cost’ – or opportunity cost – of the decision. This can be demonstrated by examining the opportunity cost of reading this book. Let us assume that you have a maximum of four hours each week to spend studying just two topics – construction economics and construction technology. The more you study construction economics, the higher will be your expected grade; the more you study construction technology, the higher will be your expected grade in that subject. There is a trade-off, between spending one more hour reading this book and spending that hour studying technology. In this example there is a fixed trade-off ratio. In practice, however, some people are better suited to some subjects than others and the same thing can be applied to resources. As a general rule, therefore, resources are rarely equally adaptable to alternative projects.
In construction, or any other economic sector, it is rare to experience a constant opportunity-cost ratio, in which each unit of production can be directly adapted to an alternative use. It is far more usual in business trade-off decisions to see each additional unit of production cost more in forgone alternatives than the previously produced unit. This rule is formally referred to as the law of increasing opportunity costs. This can be illustrated with the ‘guns or butter’ argument – this states that, at any point in time, a nation can have either more military goods (guns) or civilian goods (butter) – but not in equal proportions. For example, consider the hypothetical position in which all resources in the first instance are devoted to making civilian goods, and the production of military goods is zero. If we begin production of military goods, at first production will increase relatively quickly, as we might find some engineers who could easily produce military goods and their productivity might be roughly the same in either sector. Eventually, however, as we run out of talent, it may become necessary to transfer manual agricultural labour used to harvesting potatoes to produce military goods – and their talents will be relatively ill-suited to these new tasks. We may find it necessary to use fifty manual labourers to obtain the same increment in military goods output that we achieved when we hired one sophisticated engineer for the first units of military goods. Thus the opportunity cost of an additional unit of military goods will be higher when we use resources that are inappropriate to the task. By using poorly suited resources, the cost increases as we attempt to produce more and more military goods and fewer and fewer civilian goods.
The law of increasing opportunity costs is easier to explain using a production possibility curve. Using these curves, it is possible to show the maximum amount of output that can be produced from a fixed amount of resources. In Figure 1.1 (see page 4) we show a hypothetical trade-off between units of military goods and civilian goods produced per year. If no civilian goods are produced, all resources would be used in the production of military goods and, at the other extreme, if no military goods are produced, all resources would be used to produce civilian goods. Points A and F in Figure 1.1 represent these two extreme positions. Points B, C, D and E represent various other combinations that are possible. If these points are connected with a smooth curve, society’s production possibilities curve is obtained, and it demonstrates the trade-off between the production of military and civilian goods. These trade-offs occur on the production possibility curve. The curve is bowed outwards to reflect the law of increasing opportunity cost. If the trade-off is equal, unit for unit, the curve would not bow out, it would simply be a straight line. Other interesting observations arising from the production possibility curve are shown by points G and H. Point G lies outside the production possibility curve and is unattainable at the present point in time, but it does represent a target for the future. Point H, on the other hand, lies inside the production possibility curve and is, therefore, achievable, but it represents an inefficient use of available resources.
Figure 1.1  The trade-off between military goods and civilian goods
Points A to F represent the various combinations of military and civilian goods  that can be achieved. Connecting the points with a smooth line creates the production  possibility curve. Point G lies outside the production possibility curve and is unattainable at the present time; point H represents an inefficient use of resources at the present  time.
There are a number of assumptions underlying the production possibility curve. The first relates to the fact that we are referring to the output possible on a yearly basis. In other words, we have specified a time period during which production takes place. Second, we are assuming that resources are fixed throughout this time period. To understand fully what is meant by a fixed amount of resources, consider the two lists that follow, showing (a) factors that influence labour hours available for work and (b) factors that influence productivity, or the output per unit of input.
The number of labour hours available for work depends on the nature of human resources in society. This is determined by three factors:
• the number of economically active people that make up the labour force – this depends on the size of the population and its age structure, as children and retired persons will be economically inactive
• the percentage of the labour force who then choose to work
• prevailing customs and traditions (such as typical length of the working week, number of bank holidays, etc.).
There are a number of factors influencing the productivity of an economy or sector of the economy:
• the quantity and quality of natural and man-made resources
• the quality and extent of the education and training of the labour force • 	the levels of expectation, motivation and wellbeing
• the commitment to research and development.
The third and final assumption that is made when we draw the production possibility curve is that efficient use is being made of all available resources. In other words, society cannot for the moment be more productive with the present quantity and quality of its resources. (The concept of efficiency is examined more closely in Chapters 2, 5, 6, 7 and 8.)
According to several government reports (Egan 1998; NAO 2001, 2005 and 2007; Cabinet Office 2011), given the existing level of resources in construction it should be possible to increase productivity by at least 10 per cent. In other words, a production possibility curve representing all construction activities could be pushed out to the right, as shown in Figure 1.2 (see page 6). Several common sets of problem are identified as the root cause of this inefficiency. First, the industry demonstrates a poor safety record and an inability to recruit good staff. Second, there appears to be no real culture of learning from previous projects, and no organised career structure to develop supervisory and management grades. Third, concern is expressed about the poor level of investment into research and development that restricts the industry’s ability to innovate and learn from best practice. The fourth, and possibly most worrying, problem is the fact that technology (in the sense of IT, innovation, prefabrication and off-site assembly) is not used widely enough across the construction sector.
Another plausible scenario suggested by the production possibility curve approach is that the construction industry may at present be working within the boundary of its production curve (say, point A in Figure 1.2). In which case, an increase in output could be simply achieved by greater efficiency. Supply constraints need to be reduced, the problems identified by the government reports resolved, and the factors generally acknowledged to increase productivity (listed above) must be addressed to achieve the full potential of the industry. Both these scenarios are shown in Figure 1.2 and they support the idea that the level of productivity in the construction industry needs to improve.
In very general terms, therefore, the study of economics (and construction economics) is concerned with making efficient use of limited resources to maximise output and satisfy the greatest possible number of wants. In short, the basis of the subject rotates around the concepts of choice, scarcity and opportunity cost.
Figure 1.2  Increasing output and the production possibility curve
In this diagram we show two scenarios: (a) improved productivity shifts the entire  production possibility curve outwards over time; (b) output can be achieved more  efficiently by moving to a position of full potential on the actual production possibility
In modern society, economics is involved in all activities leading to the production of goods and services. Consequently a range of specialisms have evolved out of mainstream economics, such as transport economics, health economics, business economics, financial economics, agricultural economics, labour economics, international economics and, even, ecological economics. Hence it is not particularly surprising that many students in the twenty-first century are expected to read something called construction economics as part of their degree course. What is surprising, however, is that other vocationally oriented degrees do not have a similarly developed economics specialism. For example, students reading for degrees in catering, sports and leisure, publishing, retailing or computing do not benefit from a range of specialised literature in economics.
The reasons usually stated for construction warranting its own specialised economics is accounted for by the sheer size of the industry, its profound contribution to a nation’s standard of living and its products’ unique characteristics. Put very simply, the industry has five distinct qualities.
• The physical nature of the product is large, heavy and expensive.
• The construction industry is dominated by a large number of relatively small firms, spread over a vast geographical area.
• Demand for activity within the industry is directly determined by the general state of the economy as a whole.
• The method of price determination is unusually complex due to the tendering process used at various stages.
• Most projects can be considered as a ‘one-off’, as there is usually some defining quality that makes them in some ways unique.
These qualities alone have justified a number of dedicated academic publications. In 1974 the first edition of Patricia Hillebrandt’s Economic Theory and the Construction Industry was published. Subsequently several other titles have appeared – for details see the reference section at the back of this book – in particular the two-part text co-authored by Ive and Gruneberg (2000) and the edited volume by Gerard de Valence (2011). In 1982, Construction Management and Economics a specialist refereed journal began to report on research contributing to the new subject specialism. This journal is published monthly and more than 1800 papers have appeared; several of them are drawn upon to support this text. Some extracts have been selected from these papers as case study readings to consolidate the three sections of this textbook. Another relevant academic journal is Building Research and Information. This has an interdisciplinary focus, with linkages made between the built, natural, social and economic environments. Consequently many of the papers in this journal contribute to our understanding of how buildings and infrastructure impact on ecology, resources, climate change and sustainable development; appropriately several examples are cited as references.
Alongside these academic developments, there has also been a succession of government reports investigating the problems of the construction industry (for example, see Latham 1994; National Audit Office 2001; Fairclough 2002; HM Government 2008; Cabinet Office 2011). These reports have highlighted the inefficiency caused by the sheer scale and complexity of the construction industry. A recurring recommendation is the need for the construction process to be viewed in a holistic way by a multidisciplinary team. This reflects the fact that construction draws knowledge from many areas, and an important but undervalued area is economics. Indeed, it is commonly observed that far too many projects run over budget and are delivered late, with a general disrespect for the client. Clearly it should not be acceptable for construction projects to fail cost-wise, time-wise or client-wise. An authoritative study by Professor Flyvbjerg (2003: 16–26) of 258 major public transport infrastructure projects constructed across Europe, USA, Japan and developing countries between 1927 and 1998 suggests that on average costs overrun by approximately 30 per cent, deadlines are missed by as much as ten years and the expected level of demand fails to meet targets by around 40 per cent. Worryingly the cost, time and quality dimensions continue to be problematic right up to the current day.
Each of the construction economics texts that have been published to date conveys a slightly different emphasis. For example, Hillebrandt (1974, 2000) defines construction economics as the application of economics to the study of the construction firm, the construction process and the construction industry. Whereas the preference of Ive and Gruneberg (2000: xxiii) is for a slightly less orthodox approach, adapting traditional economic models to capture local circumstances even if that means losing the ability to generalise about the economy at large. As a result, there is no coherent conceptual consensus about what constitutes the precise nature of construction economics. As George Ofori (1994: 304) bluntly concluded in his seminal review of the subject: ‘Construction economics cannot be regarded as a bona-fide academic discipline. It lacks a clear indication of its main concerns and content.’ A situation that de Valence (2011: 1) suggests still exists today.
The purpose of this text is to address this lack of consensus and make the case for a coherent economic vocabulary. The crux of the argument for this new approach is the increasing importance of strategies aimed at achieving sustainable construction. In other words, there is an increasing recognition that the industry makes an important contribution to a country’s economic, social and environmental wellbeing.
INTRODUCING SUSTAINABLE CONSTRUCTION
The UK government published its first strategy for sustainable construction, Building a Better Quality of Life, in April 2000. This document aimed to provide a catalyst for change in the approach to construction processes. Subsequently it has been revised and extended, and the Strategy for Sustainable Construction published in June 2008 states the current UK position. Similar agendas have emerged in Europe, North America and some developing countries (see Chapter 15 for further discussion). Sustainable construction can be described in simple terms as comprising:
• social progress that meets the needs of everyone.
Each of these strands is underpinned by economic concepts, which provide the rationale for this book.
Part A Effective use of resources
This deals with microeconomics, and outlines the various ways of efficiently allocating resources between competing ends. In this section the prime focus is concerned with the determinants of demand and supply for infrastructure, housing, industrial buildings, commercial property, and repair and maintenance.
Part B Protection and enhancement of the environment
This section considers failures of the market system, drawing upon various environmental economic concepts and tools to encourage future members of the construction industry to evaluate projects by more than just financial criteria.
Part C Economic growth that meets the needs of everyone
This section incorporates coverage of the broader macroeconomic scene. It outlines the various government objectives that need to be achieved alongside sustainable construction. It highlights the difficulty of managing an economy and the need for professionals working in the construction industry to acquire an economic vocabulary.
Key Points 1.1
❍ The construction industry can be described in a number of ways – for example, review the broad range of activities listed in Table 1.1 (page 1).
❍ Construction has five distinguishing characteristics: (a) each project is regarded as a unique one-off product; (b) the industry is dominated by a large number of relatively small firms; (c) the general state of the economy influences demand; (d) prices are determined by tendering; and (e) projects are characterised by their ‘lumpiness’ in terms of their scale and expense.
❍ The basis of economics rotates around the concepts of choice, scarcity and opportunity cost. Hence, economics is the study of how we make choices.
❍ Any use of a resource involves an opportunity cost because an alternative use is sacrificed.
❍ The graphic representation of the trade-offs that must be made can be displayed in a production possibility curve.
❍ Sustainable construction is a strategy aimed to encourage the industry to (a) use resources more efficiently, (b) limit the environmental impact of its activities, and (c) produce buildings and infrastructure that benefit everyone.
The discipline of economics employs its own particular methodology and language. Consequently for the complete beginner it is necessary at the outset to clarify a few meanings.
Resources can be defined as the inputs used in the production of those things that we desire. Economists tend to refer to these resources as factors of production to highlight the fact that only by combining various factors can goods and services be produced. The factors of production are usually categorised into three general groups; namely, land, capital and labour – and sometimes the entrepreneur is specifically identified as a fourth entity. The point is that quantities of each factor are needed to make any good or service. To construct buildings or infrastructure, for example, labour is required to develop a plot of land, and plant and equipment, which may be hired or bought, is required to facilitate the process. To put it another way, land and labour are always combined with manufactured resources in order to produce the things that we desire. The manufactured resources are called capital, or more precisely physical capital, and consist of machines and tools.
The contribution of labour to the production process can be increased. Whenever potential labourers undergo training and learn new skills, their contribution to productive output will increase. When there is this improvement in human resources, we say that human capital has been improved. A relevant example is the effect that good trained management can have on the efficiency of a whole project. Indeed, according to Hillebrandt (2000: 104) management expertise is one of the scarcest resources of the construction industry throughout the world.
With each new construction project there is a choice to be made about the materials that will be used and the proportion of labour, plant and equipment required. In most instances, construction tends to be dominated by input costs relating to materials, components and labour. The importance, however, of the entrepreneur should not be overlooked, as without a dedicated resource managing and co-ordinating the other factors of production, virtually no business organisation could operate. In other words, an entrepreneur is sometimes regarded as a special type of human resource associated with the ability to make business decisions, take risks and foster innovation. In a small construction firm the manager-proprietor would be the entrepreneur; in a joint stock company the shareholders would take on that responsibility. (For further discussion about the role of the entrepreneur see Chapter 7.)
Each factor of production can be regarded as receiving a specific form of income. A landlord providing the use of land receives rent. Owners of physical (and monetary) capital are rewarded, directly or indirectly, and earn some form of interest payment to cover credit arrangements. Workers receive wages (salaries), and entrepreneurs gain profit. The distribution of these factor rewards (factor incomes) formed an important point of focus for the classical economists. Ricardo’s work (1817) suggested that the rewards paid to the agricultural landlord determined all other payments and this inevitably led to a tension between the interests of the landlord and those of the consumer and manufacturer. Equally Marx (1844) was concerned about the inequalities that were rewarded to labour as he claimed that they were exploited by the owners of capital and land, as he observed: a worker cannot supplement his income with ground rent or interest on capital. For general introductory purposes, however, the significance of dividing income payments into four sets of factor rewards will become evident when we consider the measurement of national income in Chapter 13.
The concept of the market is rather abstract in the sense that it encompasses the exchange arrangements of both buyers and sellers for a particular good or service. Consequently, we can envisage many markets for specific building materials, housing, professional services, etc. The recurrent feature of any market is the exchange of information about factors such as price, quality and quantity. The difference, however, between one market and the next is the degree of formality in which it functions. The stock market in any Western economy, for example, provides instant information worldwide about the prices and quantities of shares being bought and sold during the current trading period. By contrast, construction markets are less structured and more informal, and they are usually determined by geographical location.
The construction industry is concerned with producing and maintaining a wide variety of durable buildings and structures, and as a consequence, there are many construction markets. As Drew and Skitmore (1997: 470) concluded in their analysis of the competitive markets for construction: ‘The construction industry is highly fragmented, with the dominant firm being the small contractor.’ The type of construction – particularly in terms of its size and complexity, its geographical location, and the nature of the client – will define the market in each case.
Let us consider in a little more detail what traditionally happens when a new project begins. Usually a contractor undertakes to organise, move and assemble the various inputs, and as such provides a service – a service of preparing the site before work commences, and assembling and managing the process thereafter. Subsequently, various subcontractors add their services – such as plumbing, painting, plastering, glazing, roofing, or whatever the specific job requires. As a result the typical project process can easily become a series of ‘separate’ operations undertaken by various parties as set out in Table 1.2.
Table 1.2  Parties traditionally supplying a construction project
Parties Involved in Supply	Responsibilities
Provide specialist advice concerning structural,
Architects and Designers
Identify key specifications.
Liaises between the client and the  construction team.
Main Contractor
Provide building materials and related
The level of competition for all this work depends upon the complexity of the construction (which to some extent will be reflected in the cost per square metre). The idea of complexity is particularly important in construction markets as it determines the number of businesses interested in competing for the work. In most cases, firms will not bid for work beyond their local district as the costs of transporting materials, plant and labour are relatively high. Travelling is unnecessary when the same type of work is available in the firm’s own neighbourhood or catchment area. If, however, the construction project is very complex and/or very large, the costs per square metre are likely to increase and the relative costs of transport in relation to the total costs will decrease. The market catchment area for this highly specialised work will broaden. The following formula may make this clearer:
complexity + large size = competing firms from a wider geographical area
The converse of this rule explains why construction markets are so often dominated by small local firms subcontracting for work in or near their home towns. Indeed, it is only the biggest firms that can manage to compete on a national or international basis. Markets in the construction industry should, therefore, be defined as comprising those firms that are willing and able to compete for a contract in a specific geographical area. In other words, the total number of firms interested in work of a particular type can be referred to as comprising the local market.
In construction the services of one firm are often easy to substitute by contracting another firm with the same type of expertise. To the extent that prices in construction markets often find their own level, the theory behind this behaviour is examined in Chapters 3 to 8. For the moment, it will suffice to understand that the market for construction refers to a diverse and broad range of activities made
Figure 1.3  A complex set of markets for one building project
In the flow diagram the building project is represented as a sequence of stages. Each stage is completed by a number of firms supplying their services.
Construction Markets
Adapted from Turin (1975:
up of many markets. To emphasise this point, consider the flow diagram set out in Figure 1.3 (page 12).
In Figure 1.3 we represent a set of markets that could be involved in the construction of a small commercial building. The construction process from inception to completion is shown to comprise a number of separate markets. The completion of each operation, or stage, is the concern of several construction firms competing to supply materials, components, labour, etc. Figure 1.3 highlights the number of fragmented activities involved in completing just one small building. Each independent firm, in effect, is more concerned with its specific contribution than the project as a whole. In many ways, the next project in a firm’s market sector may well be competing for its attention while it is still finishing the present project.
We discuss the characteristics of fragmentation and the resulting poor flow of information in Chapters 6 and 9 respectively. We also identify these issues as a problem to resolve in Chapter 15, where we analyse loosely connected activities as a barrier to achieving sustainable construction.
This introductory chapter aims to explain what construction economics is all about. Therefore, apart from identifying the central concepts, we need to consider the methods employed by economists, as the approach taken to a discipline also helps to specify the nature of the subject. In general terms, economics is a social science and it attempts to make use of the same kinds of methods as other sciences, such as biology, physics and chemistry. Like these other sciences, economics uses models or theories.
Economic models are simplified representations of the real world that we use to understand, explain and predict economic phenomena.
These models may take on various forms such as verbal statements, numerical tables and graphs – and, at the more advanced level, mathematical equations. For the most part, the models presented in this text consist of verbal statements and graphs.
A particular challenge faced by students of construction economics is that many of the processes in the industry do not lend themselves easily to generalisations and models. First, the construction industry involves a large variety of interests and parties that makes the process rather complex and plagued with unwarranted assumptions about what is possible. Second, economic analysis is only one of the disciplines contributing to the process as a whole. And, third, there is a distinct lack of vision about the role of construction in society and how it could better serve its clients. As Professor Duccio Turin poetically observed:
[T]he building process is a world of ‘as if’. It is ‘as if’ the client knew what he wanted when he commissioned the building from a designer; it is ‘as if’ the designer was in a position to advise the client on the best value-formoney he could obtain in the market; it is ‘as if’ contractual procedures were devised to ensure that the client would get the best possible deal from the profession and from the market place; it is ‘as if’ the manufacturer of building materials and components knew in advance what is expected of him and geared his production to such expectation; it is ‘as if’ the contractor knew how his resources were used, was in a position to control them, and was able to use this experience on his next job.
Although this summary of the industry was expressed nearly 30 years ago, as the text unfolds you will realise some striking similarity between then and now. It is this complex, fragmented and conservative nature that gives the subject matter of construction economics its appeal – as economists seek to unravel these seemingly unconnected threads of random behaviour. Economic models seek to identify the interrelationship between the key variables and simplify what is happening in the sector. So although some economic models may at first appear abstract, they do have practical applications. The important point we are trying to clarify is that an economic model cannot be criticised as unrealistic merely because it does not represent every last detail of the real world that it is seeking to analyse. If the model elucidates the central issues being studied, then it is worthwhile. For example, students may be expected to commence their course by completing an assignment based on a theoretical economic model of competition in the marketplace. This provides a simple introduction to the economic framework and the opportunity to demonstrate how construction deviates from or reflects this reference point. In short, the model provides a starting point – it enables us to proceed.
Following the recommendations of the Fairclough report (2002: 34) the construction industry should favour models that prioritise strategies aimed to improve sustainability, competitiveness, productivity and value to clients. In Part A, we present models of market behaviour that encourage a far better grasp of the meaning and purpose of efficiency, competition and profit. In Part C, we introduce a model of aggregation to study the operation of the whole economy that brings a fresh dimension to productivity by reviewing the total output of construction and reflecting on its contribution to the total output of an economy. In Part B, we bring the environment into the traditional model as a key variable for construction and the economy to consider. When the whole book has been studied, we identify a significant number of concepts that underpin an understanding of sustainability.
This leaves the precise nature and details of the models to emerge as the book unfolds and their purpose should become self-evident. Once we have determined that a model does predict real-world phenomena, then the scientific approach requires that we consider evidence to test the usefulness of a model. This is why economics is referred to as an empirical science – empirical meaning that real data is gathered to confirm that our assumptions are right.
An Example of an Economic Model
Before closing this section on models, we review one specific example to analyse and explain how income flows around an economy. Economists begin their explanation by ignoring the government sector, the financial sector and the overseas sector – that is, the circular flow model represents a simplified, scaled-down economy in which relationships are assumed to exist only between households and businesses.
To make the model effective, it is assumed that households sell factors of production to businesses and in return receive income in the form of wages, interest, rents and profits. This is shown in the bottom loop in Figure 1.4. The businesses sell finished goods and services to households in exchange for household expenditure. This is shown in the top loop in Figure 1.4. These assumptions are reasonably realistic. Businesses will only make what they can sell. Production will necessitate buying in land, labour, capital and enterprise, and the monies paid for these factors of production will generate respective income payments.
Already, without building in any of the complications of the real world, we begin to sense several insights or starting points. Clearly there is a close relationship between the income of a nation, its output and the level of expenditure, and we shall investigate this further in Chapter 13. Also, we can see how money enables households to ‘vote’ for the goods and services desired, and this will be developed further in Chapters 2 to 5. The perceptive reader will note that the model fails to include any reference to the environment and, as we explained above, this represents the contents of Part B. The model also explicitly excludes reference to the role of governments, overseas economies and financial institutions and these aspects are included in Part C. Again we can see how the model enables us to progress into the subject.
Figure 1.4  The circular flow model: a two sector economy
In this simplified model there are only households and businesses. Goods and services  flow in one direction in return for money. This exchange can be thought of as a  circular flow.
THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENTS AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
The importance of the construction industry to the overall wellbeing of the economy means that most governments are concerned that it becomes a highly efficient sector. As a consequence, the government’s role as a client, regulator, policy-maker and a sponsor of change is raised at several points throughout the text. Equally the role of the financial sector makes a significant contribution to the effective management of the economy and the funding of construction projects. Any self-respecting text on economics must make some reference to the financial crisis sparked by the 2007 credit crunch that has troubled economies around the world. This crisis is still not fully resolved at the time of writing. In October 2010, Mervyn King, the Governor of the Bank of England, predicted that the aftermath of this crisis would hang over markets for many years to come. These themes are discussed throughout Part C of the text.
Effective protection of the environment forms a key part of any text concerning sustainability. Environmental economics is important for several reasons: first, because the environment has an intrinsic value that must not be overlooked; second, because the sustainability agenda extends the time horizon of any analysis to assure equity between generations; and, third, demands must be viewed on a wholelife basis and this is particularly important in the context of products that last for more than 30 years. Any model of analysis that seeks to identify general principles of sustainable development must include, at the very least, these three dimensions. We explore these issues and related concepts in Part B and bring them all together in Chapter 15 where we review the possibility of achieving the government’s sustainable construction agenda.
Microeconomics and Macroeconomics
Economics is typically divided into two types of analysis: microeconomics and macroeconomics. Consider the definitions of the two terms.
Microeconomics is the study of individual decision-making by both individuals and firms.
Macroeconomics is the study of economy-wide phenomena resulting from group decision-making in entire markets. As such, it deals with the economy as a whole.
One way to understand the distinction between these two approaches is to consider some generalised examples. Microeconomics is concerned with determining how prices emerge and change, and how firms respond. It involves the examination of the effects of new taxes, the determination of a firm’s profit-maximising level of production, and so on. In other words, it concerns the economic behaviour of individuals – such as clients, contractors, surveyors and engineers – in various markets. We study this type of analysis in Part A. In contrast, questions relating to the rate of inflation, the amount of national unemployment, the growth rate of the whole economy and numerous other economy-wide subjects all fall in the realm of macroeconomic analysis. In other words, macroeconomics deals with aggregates or totals, and this forms the basis of the three chapters that comprise Part C.
You should be aware, however, of the blending together of microeconomics and macroeconomics in modern economic theory. Modern economists are increasingly using microeconomic analysis – the study of decision-making by individuals and by firms – as the basis for macroeconomic analysis. They do this because, even though aggregates are being examined in macroeconomic analysis, those aggregates are made up of the actions of individuals and firms. The study of any specific industry involves both microeconomic and macroeconomic approaches; particularly when the industry is multi-product, and has national and international significance.
Throughout this text the interaction between the construction sector and the other sectors of the economy is a constant reference point. In some texts a sectoral approach is referred to as mesoeconomics, derived from the Greek word mesos meaning intermediate. This is done to make it clear that the study of any specific sector or industry inevitably falls between the conventional microeconomic and macroeconomic categories. (These two terms are also of Greek derivation: macros meaning large and micros small.)
Consequently, to gain a comprehensive understanding of construction activity, it is advisable to embrace three perspectives – a broad macro overview of the economy, a specific sectoral study of the industry, and a detailed microanalysis of the individual markets in which construction firms operate. Studying the complete text, therefore, should provide a greater understanding of winning and completing projects in an efficient and sustainable manner. Figure 1.5 summarises how these three elements contribute to a fuller understanding of a project. In many ways, it models the overall approach of the text.
Figure 1.5  A model for construction economics: a new approach
Key Points 1.2
❍ We need to use scarce resources, such as land, labour, capital and entrepreneurship, to produce any economic good or service.
❍ The exchange of information between buyers and sellers about factors such as price, quality and quantity happens in a market. Construction is made up of a diverse range of markets, as the industry comprises a large number of relatively small firms.
❍ Every economic model, or theory, is based on a set of assumptions. How realistic these assumptions are is not as important as how effective they make the model or theory.
❍ Microeconomics involves the study of individual decision-making. Macroeconomics involves the study of aggregates. Mesoeconomics combines the territory shared by microeconomics and macroeconomics to study a specific sector such as construction.
The system of industrial classification used for statistical and government purposes favours a narrow definition of the construction industry that includes only firms that are involved with building and civil engineering. This categorisation is derived from the United Nations International Standard of Industrial Classification (ISIC). There are also American and European equivalents: the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) and the General Industrial Classification of Economic Activities – otherwise known as NACE. In other words, firms generally recognised as officially comprising the construction sector tend to embrace a range of ‘on-site’ activities including those relating to infrastructure, new construction, repair, maintenance and (eventually) demolition. Table 1.3 shows the type of work that is classified into these various sectors and Table 1.4 gives some indication of the monetary value of these different activities in Great Britain.
As Table 1.4 (on page 20) shows, repair and maintenance are of major importance and comprise nearly 40 per cent of the total annual activity – this includes all public and private sector work carried out on houses, infrastructure and commercial buildings. It is also evident that government departments and their agencies are significant clients of the construction industry. As both Tables 1.3 and 1.4 suggest, official statistics often draw a distinction between public and private sector activity. The public sector includes everything that is owned and/or funded by national or local governments such as roads, schools, the National Health Service, and local council leisure centres. In fact, a close examination of output tables reveals that approximately 30 per cent of construction industry turnover relates to public sector clients. Obviously this includes a vast range of contracts, varying in size from £10,000 for a small flood defence scheme to £9.4 billion for the new venues and infrastructure for the Olympic Park in east London.
Table 1.3  The construction industry – narrowly defined
Areas of Construction	Examples of type of work
Gas and electricity
Airports, harbours, railways
Public sector/housing associations

Schools, colleges, universities
Health facilities
Private industrial 	Warehouses
PFI (and similar public private partnerships) Schools/hospitals (where privately funded)

Extensions and conversions
Repair and maintenance 	Renovations and refurbishment
The percentage of public sector construction work in the UK has fallen considerably since 1980, as many of the activities traditionally in the public domain have been privatised. Utilities and services such as gas, electricity, water supply, telecommunications and railways were previously ‘pure’ state owned activities; today they are quasi-public – privately owned but ‘regulated’ and controlled by specific government agencies. This means that there is a new expanding sector of ‘regulated’ private sector work that is reliant on public sector decisions before it can be executed. More recently, the private sector has also been given a greater role in the funding, building and maintenance of public facilities such as hospitals, schools, prisons and roads. In these public private partnerships, the private sector organises the funds and manages the risks, while the public sector specifies the level of service required and ultimately owns the assets – as they are commonly returned to public ownership after 10, 15 or 25 years. These ‘regulated’ and ‘partnership’ arrangements are explained further in Chapters 2 and 6 respectively. The important point for our purposes is that expenditure on the construction of public facilities is increasingly classified as private sector expenditure in the official data. (Figure 2.4 on page 38 shows the distribution of work across the public and private sector divide over the last 50 years.)
Table 1.4  Value of construction output in Great Britain
Types of work	     Value of Output (£million)
Housing –  public
Total (of all work)
Construction Statistics Annual (ONS 2011a: Table 2.1).
Sources of International Data
A narrow definition of the construction industry confines official statistical data to the ‘site-based’ activities of firms involved with buildings and infrastructure. As Table 1.3 shows, this data is typically disaggregated into house building, private commercial and industrial building (that is, non-residential), infrastructure (civil engineering), repair and maintenance, and so on. Across Europe it is possible to see some common trends. Aggregating figures across 27 European countries, 26 per cent of construction output is repair and maintenance, 19 per cent is house building, 22 per cent is infrastructure and 33 per cent is non-residential (FIEC 2012).
A modern alternative, however, is to widen the statistical definition and go beyond the narrow boundaries created by the international classification to include the whole life cycle of construction: design, production, use, facility management, demolition, etc. In fact, the Pearce Report (2003) argued that to fully understand the extent of what is meant by a sustainable industry required data relating to the broad scope of construction productivity including its environmental and social impacts. (The new approach adopted in this text will help to clarify the contributions that the sector makes to these wider concerns.) As Pearce (2003: 24) defined it, a broad definition should include the mining and quarrying of raw materials, the manufacture and sale of construction products, and the related professional services such as those of architects, engineers and facilities managers. For example, a detailed analysis of current available data in Great Britain indicates that in addition to the 1,200,000 workers employed in the traditional construction sector, there are approximately 450,000 engineers, architects, facilities managers and chartered surveyors supplying professional services relating to construction and property, about 650,000 employed in the manufacture of building products and equipment, 25,000 involved in mining and quarrying construction materials and a further 100,000 workers selling building materials. In effect this broad approach increases the significance of construction as the size of the industry virtually doubles in terms of employment and output. The implications of the contrast between the narrow and broad definitions will be reviewed further in Chapter 13, where we explain the measurement of economic industry activity in more detail, and in the final reading where we review Squicciarini and Asikainen’s (2011) paper that addresses the inability of statistical analyses to capture the true scope and impact of construction.
The International Council for Research and Innovation in Building set up a project to analyse the entirety of the broad construction sector and published its findings in 2004. The new broad system approach was tested in nine countries and the project’s conclusions confirmed the fact that the construction system as a whole seems to be roughly twice the size of the conventional construction sector (Carassus 2004: For example, in Canada it was assessed that the broad construction cluster employed nearly 1,800,000 people, of which only 900,000 worked in the traditionally defined construction sector. Similarly in France the whole sector on a broad definition was assessed to be responsible for the employment of 2,358,000 people, of which 1,600,000 were employed on site as contractors (Carassus 2004: 45 and 78).
Table 1.5 Sources of international data
The European Construction Industry Federation (FIEC)
FIEC was created in 1905 to specifically promote the interests of the construction industry across Europe. The current membership is made up of 29 countries and 34 national federations. They represent 3.1 million construction enterprises employing a total of more than 15 million people. Publications include Construction Activity in Europe which gives a detailed statistical breakdown per member country.
United Nations Statistical Division
This organisation is committed to the advancement of a global statistical system. Consequently it develops standards and norms for statistical activities, and supports countries’ efforts to strengthen their national statistical systems. Comprehensive sets of data can be accessed and individual macroeconomic variables can be examined by selecting countries and years of interest.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
The OECD encompasses 30 member countries sharing a commitment to the market economy (in some quarters the group is referred to as the rich countries club). Its work covers economic and social issues. Publications include The OECD Observer. a journal covering a number of themes including statistics and sustainable development, and a series of Main Economic Indicators, divided by subject (including construction) and by

Eurostat provides the European Union with a high quality statistical information service, and co-operates closely with other international data organisations (such as the UN and OECD). The Eurostat Yearbook is published annually and presents a comprehensive selection of statistical data covering areas such as labour markets, economy, international trade, industry, services and the environment (it is freely available online as a pdf file).
The problem faced by academic researchers, however, is the different institutional arrangements that exist in each country and the different processes, agencies and systems used for data collection. In other words, government sources of data usually conform to the established narrow definition of construction, as collated and presented by the European Construction Industry Federation (FIEC). But access and symmetry is lacking when attempts are made to measure the size of the industry using the broader construction system approach. Some of the inconsistencies will be uncovered if you follow the links detailed in Table 1.5, as in many instances one series of data cannot be precisely compared to another across national boundaries.
Sources of UK Data
In the UK, economic and construction data is collected and published by the Office for National Statistics (commonly referred to as ONS). Its website ( provides a comprehensive range of statistical indicators and it is the starting point to search for most data relating to UK society, demography and the economy. The ONS is free from political influence and its role is to provide an evidence base
Table 1.6  A brief guide to official sources of UK statistics
UK National Accounts
This publication is normally referred to simply by the colour of its cover as the Blue Book.  It is published annually in the autumn by the ONS, and is considered to be a most  important source of data for the UK macroeconomy, since it provides a comprehensive  breakdown of GDP. As with other ONS publications, recent editions have become more  user friendly. For example, there are now useful notes explaining how to interpret the  accounts, a subject index and a glossary of terms.
Economic & Labour Market Reviews
A monthly publication covering issues broadly relating to the economy, the labour market and price inflation. Each issue contains a current economic review, independent forecasts and a mix of articles on various aspects of data. Its primary objective, however, is to provide a gateway to access the current statistical releases. The content always includes a few pages of key data plus a directory of online tables, to highlight web pages on the ONS site that have been recently updated. Much of the data in Part C of this text is drawn from this source.
Monthly Digest of Statistics
As the name implies, this is an amalgam of statistics; it has been published monthly since  January 1946. It covers a wide range of topics, including economic, social and  demographic issues. It presents data on prices, the balance of payments and employment.
Monthly publication of the ONS relating to financial indices such as interest rates,  exchange rates and the money supply. Editions since 1997 also show data relating to  inflation.
Bank of England Inflation Report
This is published quarterly with the Bank of England’s Quarterly Bulletin. The Inflation  Report serves a dual purpose. First, it provides a comprehensive review of specialised  indices and a commentary on their forecasts. Second, it is the official publication in which the minutes of the monetary policy committee (described in Chapter 12) are  made available to the public.
for policy and decision making. The Bank of England and the Treasury are also responsible for a significant number of statistical releases relating to finance and the current economic climate, and this output is often supported by commentary from government economists.
For specific information relating to construction, the key source in the UK is the Construction Statistics Annual. A new edition is published each year around August, and it can be freely viewed in its entirety on the ONS website. Most of the tables are available in spreadsheet form, allowing the quarterly analyses to be annualised quite easily. The publication amalgamates all construction statistics produced by central and local government, together with data from a quarterly survey of private sector construction firms. It also carries an appendix that provides detailed notes on methodology and definitions to clarify the tables and figures. Overall it provides a comprehensive picture of the UK construction industry through the last decade, together with some international comparisons. (For example, the references to industry sectors in Table 1.3 and data on the value of output shown in Table 1.4 are derived from Construction Statistics Annual.) As with most economic data there is always a time lag, so the 2011 edition only presents data up until 2010. Consequently, data quoted in this text can appear out of date before the book even goes to print. It is important, therefore, that you have the confidence to research data for yourself, and this is one of the reasons that website sources are provided.
When using official national statistics, in hard copy or from the Internet, it is useful to be aware of several conventions regarding their presentation. First, the symbols shown in Table 1.7 represent a summary of the main footnotes.
Table 1.7  Symbols used to annotate official statistics
- 	Nil or less than half the final digit shown
These qualifying notes make it clear that published official statistics can be no more than an estimate. This observation is not made to discredit official statistics but to emphasise that any errors or omissions are corrected as soon as possible – the ultimate goal is to produce data sets that are as reliable and robust as possible.
Second, some statistical series do not have sufficiently consistent data to refer to the United Kingdom as a whole, and only refer to Great Britain or are restricted simply to England, Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland. To give just one example, construction output figures tend to be specific to Great Britain. There is also a possibility that the data set may only relate to a quarter – in which case, it may be necessary to multiply the figures by four to get an approximation for the whole year. So take great care when reading the headings and footnotes that are associated with each table. Figures relating to money can be expressed in three ways.
• The most straightforward is to represent economic activity in ‘face value’ terms; or put more simply, in prices used for everyday transactions. Such measurements are referred to as current prices; an example is shown in Table 1.4.
• A more sophisticated option is to adjust figures to allow for inflation as this makes comparisons across time more meaningful, such adjustments are referred to as constant prices, as they are expressed in terms of a specific base year. As an example scan forward to Figure 2.4 (on page 38) where levels of construction activity over a period of 50 years can be confidently compared as the distortions caused by changes in value across time have been removed by referencing all prices to the year 2005.
• Time series data may also be expressed in terms of index numbers – in this type of data set the starting point (or base year) is given the value of 100, which allows subsequent percentage changes to be quickly identified. Index numbers and examples of their use are the subject of Chapter 14.
Finally, when reviewing any construction data it must always be borne in mind that the construction industry (right across Europe) comprises a very large number of small, geographically dispersed firms, and this makes it difficult for government agencies monitoring the industry to compile comprehensive data sets. Furthermore, alongside any official activities ‘put through the books’ and recorded in national statistics, there may be unofficial work carried out for ‘cash in hand’. As a consequence, the data agencies in some countries include an estimated value for so-called ‘unrecorded output’. The relationship between the size of the official (formal) economy and its unofficial (informal) equivalent is discussed further in Chapter 13.
Key Points 1.3
❍ The construction industry may be defined in many ways, but its impacts always cut right across the economy.
❍ A narrow definition of the construction industry includes the erection of buildings, infrastructure work, repair, maintenance and demolition. Examples of the activities are presented in Table 1.3.
❍ A broad definition of the construction industry adds to the narrow definition to include mining and quarrying of raw materials, the manufacture and sale of construction products, and related professional services. Examples of the broad range of activities are shown in Table 1.1.
❍ The annual value of construction output (expressed in current prices), in Great Britain, for the decade 2000 to 2010 ranged from £71 billion to £114 billion.
George Ofori’s review of construction economics has become a standard reference point for those commencing a study of the subject. In fact, Andrew Cooke (1996: 13) suggested ‘that all students of economics in a construction related field should read it at least twice – once before they embark on their studies and once when they are about to complete them’. The following extract provides an opportunity to partly meet his recommendation.
Unfortunately, as you will see, one of Ofori’s main concerns is that there is no real consensus about the exact definition of construction economics. Yet since his paper was written, the aim of sustainable construction has gained momentum and the importance of improving economic efficiency in the industry has been broadly discussed in various government reports (for example, Egan 1998; HM Government 2008; This raises two related questions that you might consider now and as the text unfolds. First, what are the main hurdles in defining economics and, second, does the development of a sustainability agenda provide the necessary focus to create a more coherent approach?
The questions that relate to each of the readings are set to stimulate debate and further exploration. Those interested in pursuing the first two questions should see De Valence’s (2006) paper where, across five pages, he manages to discuss the problems of classifying the boundaries of the subject area, or the chapter by Brochner (2011) that considers the current forces of change within the discipline and where construction economics appears to be heading.
George Ofori (1994) ‘Establishing Construction Economics as an Academic
Discipline’, Construction Management and Economics 12:
What is construction economics?
Perhaps the most basic feature of a discipline is a clear idea among its practitioners and researchers about what it entails, its aims and its boundaries. In this section, adopting a chronological approach, definitions of construction economics offered by various writers are considered.1
Drewer (1978) suggests that Turin was perhaps the first to attempt to impose scientific order on a ‘pre-Newtonian’ situation. Turin (1975) remarked that ‘...if economics is concerned with the allocation of scarce resources, it follows that building economics should be concerned with scarce building resources’ (p. ix). Stone (1976) observes that ‘building economics’ embraces ‘those aspects of design and production, and the related problems of organisation which affect the costs of a building’ (p. xi), including forms of construction, methods of production, organisation of the industry and the impact of new methods, materials and forms of organisation and contractual relationships.
Rakhra and Wilson (1982) distinguish between ‘building economics’ and ‘economics of building’. They suggest: ‘Building economics takes an aggregate view of the building sub-section of the construction sector’ (p. 51), embracing levels of building activity, the industry’s contribution to the economy, impact of changes in government’s policies and the nature, structure and organisation of the industry. ‘Economics of building’ was an ‘examination at the specific project level of the resource transformation that is known as building’ (p. 51), embracing cost-benefit consequences of design alternatives and choice of building components, lifecycle costing, effect of various combinations of labour and plant on site productivity and analysis of project resource requirements. Few writers refer to or adopt Rakhra and Wilson’s (1982) distinction, notable exceptions being Bowen and Edwards (1985), Ofori (1990) and Bowen (1993).
Seeley (1983) opted for a very narrow definition, remarking that ‘…building economics has been widely used ... to describe the investigation of factors influencing building cost, with particular reference to the interaction of building design variables’ (p. v). Ahuja and Walsh (1983) define cost engineering, which may be considered a form of construction economics, as ‘…an active approach in the design, construction and commissioning phases of a project, aimed at extracting the best possible value for money throughout each activity that has cost implications’ (p. ix).
Hillebrandt (1985) adopted a broad perspective, defining construction economics as ‘the application of the techniques and expertise of economics to the study of the construction firm, the construction process and the construction industry’ (p. 1). Similarly, this journal defines construction economics as including design economics, cost planning, estimating and cost control, the economic functioning of firms within the construction sector and the relationship of the sector to national and international economics. Ashworth (1988) considers construction economics as embracing clients’ requirements, impact of a development on its surrounding areas, relationship between space and shape, assessment of capital costs, cost control, life-cycle costing and economics of the industry in general.
Bon (1989), whose book was ‘to offer a first step toward a theoretical framework for building economics’ (p. xiii), suggests that ‘building economics is about economising the use of scarce resources throughout the life cycle of a building…’ (p. xiii) and concerns the ‘application of standard investment decision criteria to buildings as a special class of capital assets’ (p. xiii). Johnson (1990) adopts a similar definition, suggesting that ‘…knowledge of economics can provide a basis for making difficult trade-offs associated with both design and long-term management of buildings’ (p. 9).
Ruegg and Marshall (1990) promise to show readers ‘...how to apply the concepts and methods of economics to decisions about the location, design, engineering, construction, management, operation, rehabilitation and disposition of buildings’ (p. xi). Drake and Hartman’s (1991) perspective is similarly project oriented, considering construction economics as being concerned with ends and scarce means in the Construction Industry’ (p. 1057) and listing the, mainly surveying, techniques it embraces. Raftery (1991) suggests that ‘building economics’ could be said to be primarily about a combination of technical skills, informal optimisations, cost accounting, cost control, price forecasting and resource allocation. Finally, Bowen (1993) describes ‘economics of building’ as focusing ‘on the application of quantitative techniques using financial criteria for the provision of financial advice to the design team’ (p. 4).
From the above discussion, a common definition of construction economics does not exist. The chronological approach adopted helps to show that the issue has not become any clearer over time. For construction economics to develop into a discipline, a common definition is required to set the framework for issues to be considered and methodological approaches to be adopted. The definition should relate to the economic principles of scarcity and choice, refer to what is being studied (projects, practices, organisations and enterprises and industry) and state the overall aim of the discipline.
Two distinct segments of construction economics emerge from the discussion in the previous section. The first relates to construction projects, whereas the second concerns the industry. Ofori (1990) terms these ‘construction project economics’ and ‘construction industry economics’, respectively (these terms are used in the rest of the paper). However, again from the above definitions, some writers consider one or the other of the segments to be the entire field of construction economics or building economics. For example, Bon’s (1989), Johnson’s (1990) and Ruegg and Marshall’s (1990) ‘building economics’ and Drake and Hartman’s (1991) ‘construction economics’ relate only to projects and are similar to Rakhra and Wilson’s (1982) ‘economics of building’ and Ofori’s (1990) ‘construction project economics’, respectively. However, Stone’s (1976) ‘building economics’ and Hillebrandt’s (1985) ‘construction economics’ incorporate both segments. The present author prefers and adopts the title construction economics as a perspective encompassing both the project and the industry, as this enables all aspects of the field to be studied.
The project-related segment is basically about techniques (such as cost planning, life-cycle costing and value engineering) – Raftery (1991) likens it to ‘cost accounting and management’. It is better known, as it has received greater attention from researchers and in course syllabi (Ofori, 1990). However, even here, there is some confusion. Seeley (1983, p. 1) appears to make ‘cost control’ synonymous with construction project economics and Kelly (1983), as well as Ferry and Brandon (1991), seem to equate ‘cost planning’ with construction project economics. Male and Kelly (1991) refer to cost management and define it as ‘a synthesis of traditional quantity surveying skills ... with structured cost reduction/cost substitution procedures using the generation of ideas by brainstorming ... in a multidisciplinary team’ (p. 25). Finally, Kelly and Male (1993) have combined cost management, which emphasises cost reduction at the design stage, with value management, which focuses on clients’ needs prior to design, to obtain the ‘comprehensive service’ of project economics, which ‘…seeks to control time, cost, and quality during design and construction within the context of project functionality’ (Marshall, 1993, p. 170).
It is necessary to delineate, agree upon and continuously research into and improve its segments and construction economics should be developed as an integrated whole.
Cole (1983) distinguishes between the core of a discipline, the ‘fully evaluated and universally accepted ideas’ (p. 111) found in all undergraduate textbooks and the research frontier which includes all on-going studies, most of which eventually turn out to be of Reading 1
little or no significance. Does construction economics have a core of confirmed and accepted concepts?
Precise and common definitions are indispensable building blocks in any discipline, a key base of its conceptual structure. Authors in construction economics often find it necessary to define their main terms (e.g. Batten, 1990; Ive, 1990). Bowen and Edwards (1985) and Bowen (1993) define such basic terms as estimating, forecasting, cost and price. Some construction economics terms, each of which has a clear definition in general economics, are considered in this section.
The industry
There is, as yet, no accepted definition of the construction industry (Ofori, 1990). Some writers consider it as involving only site activity, others include the planning and design functions and yet others extend it to cover the manufacturing and supply of materials and components, finance of projects or management of existing construction items (Turin, 1975; Hillebrandt, 1985). This leads to difficulties. For example, writers’ basic data and inferences often differ, simply because they adopted different definitions of ‘construction’.
