Performance measurement of construction firms in developing countries
To cite this article: Truong‐Van Luu , Soo‐Yong Kim , Huu‐Loi Cao & Young‐Min Park (2008)
Performance measurement of construction firms in developing countries, Construction
Management and Economics, 26: 4, 373-386, DOI: 10.1080/01446190801918706
To link to this article:
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
Construction Management and Economics (April 2008) 26, 373–386
Performance measurement of construction firms in developing countries
TRUONG-VAN LUU1*, SOO-YONG KIM1*, HUU-LOI CAO2 and
Interdisciplinary Program of Construction Engineering and Management, Pukyong National University, San 100, Yongdang-Dong, Nam-Gu, Busan, 608-739, Republic of Korea
AnGiang Construction Corporation, Long Xuyen, Vietnam
Received 23 April 2007; accepted 15 January 2008
Many large contractors in Vietnam are lacking an effective method to measure their performance and identify weaknesses and threats. The integration of the balanced scorecard (BSC) and strengths-weaknessesopportunities-threats (SWOT) matrix is described to evaluate the strategic performance of large contractors in Vietnam. The AnGiang Construction Company (ACC) was used as an example to validate the approach. The BSC-oriented SWOT matrix is developed to formulate the short- and long-term strategies of ACC. The benchmarking approach was adapted to evaluate the ACC’s performance and expose its competitors’ best practices for improvement. The results indicated that only the financial perspective is at a poor level on the performance scale whereas the customer, learning and growth, and internal process perspectives are at a moderate level on the performance scale. The effective evaluation matrix uncovered 11 effective solutions that could be grouped under four categories: (1) innovating organizational structure; (2) effectively managing processes at construction sites; (3) stepping up cost control; and (4) improving equipment management. The findings may benefit not only Vietnamese construction firms but also firms in other developing countries to identify their strategies, quantify the strategic performance, and improve their competitive advantages.
Balanced scorecard (BSC), construction companies, SWOT analysis, performance measurement, Vietnam.
Introduction	among domestic contractors (Cao, 2006).
reasons, the development of effective methods is very
Many construction firms have been unsuccessful in	necessary to identify the Vietnamese large-scale con-
their business for the past 10 years. The construction	tractor’s weaknesses and threats from the external
environment becomes riskier in developing countries	environment as well as to measure their strategic
(Ezeldin and Sharara, 2006); therefore, construction	management performance.
firms must periodically measure their performance and	By applying the balanced scorecard (BSC) and
compare with their past performance in order to find	strengths-weaknesses-opportunities-threats (SWOT)
out what should be improved (Gupta, 2004). Many	matrix, the strategic management performance of a
large construction contractors in Vietnam are lacking	large construction firm in Vietnam, a new member of
an effective method to evaluate their strengths and	the WTO with a promising economy, can be measured
weaknesses and to measure their performance. As a	and evaluated to seek continued improvements.
result, it is very difficult to raise their position in the	AnGiang Construction Company (ACC) was used as a
dynamic marketplace. Moreover, the presence of a	typical case to validate the approach.
large number of foreign construction firms during the	strategic management performance was also compared
past four years has engendered severe competition	with its competitors to seek the best practices for its
improvement. Though the research question seems to
*Author for correspondence. kims@pknu.ac.kr or	be localized, the conceptual research framework has
luutruongvan@yahoo.com	general use. Therefore, the findings are expected to be
Construction Management and Economics
ISSN 0144-6193 print/ISSN 1466-433X online # 2008 Taylor & Francis
beneficial not only for Vietnamese construction firms but also for firms in other developing countries. The major objectives of the research are to:
(1) implement a SWOT matrix for the analysis of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats so as to formulate the strategies of a typical construction firm, i.e. AnGiang Construction Company (ACC);
(2) identify and validate key performance indicators (KPIs) for monitoring and evaluating the performance of ACC;
(3) measure the strategic performance of ACC based on identified KPIs so that the reasons for success or failure could be systematically identified and then compare with competitors’ performance in order to expose best practices for improvement.
The literature review comprises three sections: background to strategic performance measurement, balanced scorecard (BSC), and previous studies on organizational performance measurement in construction industry.
Background to strategic performance measurement
It is widely accepted that strategy intensively involves performance to attain goals. However, ‘goals without performance measures do not motivate managers’ (Chaichan, 2002). Without strategic performance measurement, an organization may meet serious difficulties in managing its strategy because of no actual data for comparison with organizational objectives. The purpose of strategic performance measurement is: (1) to set direction and motivate managers; (2) to help top managers identify critical processes and critical success factors (CSFs). A critical process is a series of activities that directly affects the achievement of organizational goals (Chaichan, 2002). Identifying CSFs is the next step to drive the organization towards its goals. ‘CSFs are the limited number of areas in which satisfactory results will ensure successful competitive performance for the organization’ (Mard et al.,
A set of CSFs depends on the company’s strategy and is usually less than 10 factors in any company (Mard et al., 2004). There are different performance indicators that may affect a CSF. However too many factors can be unmanageable, thus management has to select appropriate key performance indicators (KPIs) for each CSF. ‘The art of selecting KPIs requires that management understand how the CSFs and their KPIs are significant components of the company’s corporate strategy’ (Mard et al., 2004). The main purpose of KPIs is to measure organizational performance (Chan and Chan, 2004).
Continuous efforts have been undertaken to develop methods for performance measurement. The following paragraphs will outline the development of a salient performance measurement method in the later part of the 20th century. Traditionally, most organizations assess their performance based on financial and accounting measures such as return on investment (ROI), discounted cash flow (DCF), profit margins and so on. However, financial measures concentrate on past performance, thus managers have insufficient information to make decisions. Three salient limitations of traditional measures are: (1) focusing on the past, which does not reflect current value-added actions (Kaplan and Norton, 1992); (2) failing to include other critical factors such as customer satisfaction, employee satisfaction, and the quality of products (Parker, 2000); (3) describing only one perspective of an organization’s performance, becoming out of date and focusing only on the short term (Stone, 1996). Since traditional measures are inadequate to address many issues that businesses should be concerned with (Amaratunga et al., 2001), a distinct need has emerged for the development of other methods for the incorporation of both financial and non-financial measures.
Performance measurement (PM) frameworks can be found in different journals and technical reports. Bourne et al. (2000) presented the following PM frameworks. Bitton (1990) proposed an approach to attach appropriate performance measures to decisions of breaking down the planning and control of manufacturing. Dixon et al. (1990) developed the special questionnaire, namely the performance measurement questionnaire (PMQ), for identifying strengths and failings in the current PM system and then proposing a set of performance measures. Eccles and Pyburn (1992) used a facilitated process to build a performance model linking changes in human knowledge and organizational processes. Neely et al. (1996) developed a management process to reassess the strategy of companies and to manage the review of the final set of performance measures. Parker (2000) briefly reviewed the other modern PM frameworks, i.e. benchmarking, BSC and activity-based costing (ABC). As the predecessor of BSC, the Tableau de Bord and the performance matrix emphasized the vital importance of the balance between financial and non-financial aspects in PM (Todd, 2000). The Table de Bord, a concept popularized in France, looks for ways to improve the production process by better understanding the cause–effect relationships (Epstein and Manzoni, 1998), while the performance matrix summed and computed the weightings to measure performance indices.
Balanced scorecard (BSC)
Kaplan and Norton (1996) introduced the balanced scorecard, which is ‘a management system that enables organizations to clarify their vision and strategy and translate them into action’ (BSC Institute, 2006a). The BSC framework allows most organizations to look at their performance from four perspectives: (1) financial: ‘How do we look to our shareholders? (2) customers: ‘How do our customers see us? (3) innovation and improvement: ‘How can we continue to improve our processes? and (4) internal processes: ‘What must we excel at? ’ (Parker, 2000). The BSC framework provides a balance between economic and operating performance (Amaratunga et al., 2001), financial and customer outcomes, and short- and long-term objectives of an organization. The BSC also provides leading and lagging indicators to evaluate congruence between the performance of an organization and its strategic goals (Kagioglou et al., 2001) and results in a better indication of an organization’s performance than merely financial measures (Hepworth, 1998). Moreover, BSC also supports strategic planning, transforms the strategic plan for the organization on a daily basis, provides performance measurements, helps planners identify what should be measured and enables executives to truly execute their strategies (BSC Institute, 2006b).
However, BSC is not a magic tool, ‘it is somewhat difficult and time-consuming to implement a comprehensive balanced scorecard system in a large organization. Do not embark on a balanced scorecard initiative unless your organization has a high-ranking champion, has adequate funding, and is ready to meet the challenges of change’ (BSC Institute, 2006b). As a result, long-term top management commitment is required to keep up the BSC system. The BSC is not without weaknesses. Common weaknesses are ignoring the market perspective, the absence of any mention of suppliers, and disregard for the human element (DeWaal_pages, 2002). Moreover, the BSC concept can be hard to implement and has failed in certain circumstances. Neely and Bourne (2000) identified two main reasons for the failure of measurement systems: inappropriate design of measurement systems and difficulties during the implementation phase. Other reasons for the failure of the BSC concept can be found in other published works (Epstein and Manzoni, 1998; Schneiderman, 1999; Lee and Ko, 2000; Lee et al., 2000; Amaratunga et al., 2001; DeWaal_pages, 2002).
Previous studies on organizational performance measurement in the construction industry
Continuous research efforts have been undertaken to measure performance in the construction industry. Kagioglou et al. (2001) proposed a performance measurement process framework (PMPF) which can be adapted for any organization. The PMPF is a conceptual framework based on the BSC with the addition of two perspectives, namely ‘project’ and ‘supplier’. Stewart and Mohamed (2001) developed the BSC framework allowing for the measurement of IT/IS performance. The writers used a project tier example to illustrate the application of the proposed framework. Samson and Lema (2002) presented a conceptual PM framework and proposed a set of effective indicators for Tanzanian contractors. Costa and Formoso (2003) proposed a framework to identify gaps and best practices in the PM system which is compatible with the construction firms’ strategy in Brazil. The researchers provided guidelines for the implementation and use of PM systems. Salminen (2005) developed a system for measuring construction site performance. The researcher analysed the measurement results to determine the success factors for a construction site.
It was noted that there are different applications of KPIs in construction. The following are the varied applications of KPIs in recent years. Chan and Chan (2004) developed a set of KPIs to measure success of construction projects. The researchers used three cases to test the validity of the proposed KPIs. Beatham et al. (2004) suggested a framework for a performance measurement system including all types of measures and aligning to the company’s strategies and objectives. Shohet (2006) proposed a set of KPIs for the tactical maintenance management for healthcare facilities.
KPIs were also applied to measure and evaluate the performance of various projects and departments. Wongsamut (2002) used KPIs to evaluate the performance of a water resource development project in Thailand. Welker (2002) applied KPIs to measure the performance of a training project. Chaichan (2002) used KPIs to measure and evaluate the performance of a construction department of Thai investors. In Vietnam, Khanh (2005) and Cao (2006) applied KPIs to measure the performance of an engineering department and the contractor, respectively. The whole performance of the above department and contractor was at only a moderate level in each case, whereas according to financial measurements it was at a good level.
The above literature implies that little effort has been devoted to the application of BSC for measuring strategic performance of construction firms in developing countries where the construction industry contributes considerably to the economy’s growth rate.
Brief overview of the Vietnamese construction market (VCM)
The purpose of this section is to clarify the representativeness of the sample chosen (i.e. This section starts with a comprehensive description of the salient characteristics of the VCM.
First, the VCM depends heavily on foreign and government orders in a segment of industrial plants (i.e. processing plants, electricity power plants, petroleum and gas disposal facilities, and so on) and infrastructure projects, with private orders in other segments. This is because labour-intensive construction is mostly given to domestic firms while plant and infrastructure construction, which needs high technology, depends on foreign investors due to domestic construction firms’ lack of supply capability. Lack of capital may be a barrier to domestic orders from the private sector.
Second, the market is mainly controlled by large and medium construction firms. There is no official definition of construction firms by size in Vietnam, thus we define a construction firm as: small when its capital is less than or equal to 5 billion VND ($US1.00 < VND 16 228); medium when its capital is between 5 billion VND and 50 billion VND; and large when its capital is 50 billion VND or more. As shown in Appendix 1, the proportions of firms in terms of size are: 74%, medium: 20%, large: However, outputs of medium and large construction firms (i.e. net revenue) contributed 89% of the total revenue of the construction sector.
Third, the construction orders may differ from region to region. The construction orders are allocated around large cities such as Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh city, and industrial zones because of the differences in economic growth.
Fourth, the central government and provincial authorities are major customers for large projects. As a result, close and cooperative relations with local government and ordering authorities are essential to achieve more orders.
Fifth, there is a sharp increase in construction demand because of the promotion of industrialization and official development assistance (ODA). Competitiveness in the VCM is greatly influenced by the capability of capital supply. Therefore, it strongly requires construction firms with financial capacity.
In order to assist readers, Appendix 1 also shows some key indicators of the construction output at national level. The Vietnamese construction industry (VCI) has accelerated in the past decade with growth in scale and quantity of output. However, the industry has faced many problems such as the complexity of the legal and institutional framework, lack of capable consultants and domestic contractors for handling large projects (Long et al., 2004), poor change management, bureaucracy of several local authorities, fraudulent practices, and kickbacks. Recently, the VCI has been satisfied with the growth in quantity thanks to low construction prices and cheap manpower, and has neglected to remain competitive in a fast-changing construction environment.
Research methods
The research method framework of this study consists of four steps: (1) corporate strategy formulation; (2) KPIs development; (3) KPIs validation; and (4) the measurement of the business strategic performance (Figure1).
Corporate strategy formulation
Since clarifying the company vision and strategy is a first step of the actual implementation of the BSC (Kaplan and Norton, 1996), identifying internal and external factors is regarded as the study initial step. Based on information from the comprehensive interviews of top management as well as the review of ACC’s documents, 26 internal factors and 17 external factors influencing the ACC’s success were preliminarily identified. Twenty-three top and middle managers, who worked for ACC more than 15 years, were asked to evaluate the influential level of factors on the success of the company using a five-point Likert-type scale (from 15no effect to 55great effect). This resulted in significant internal and external factors which were considered as inputs to analyse the SWOT matrix in the next step. Since SWOT analysis creates strategies that make sense (Lee et al., 2000), the ACC’s longterm strategy was translated into specific objectives and short-term strategies through a SWOT analysis which was conducted by interviewing five top managers. These strategies were used as a guideline to develop preliminary KPIs based on the BSC framework. Table1 presents the SWOT matrix of ACC including eight objectives which resulted from the following four integrations between: (1) strengths and opportunities (S/O); (2) strengths and threats (S/T); (3) weaknesses and opportunities (W/O); and (4) weaknesses and threats (W/T). According to the BSC framework, the ACC strategy needs to translate into four perspectives: financial, customer, internal business process, and learning and growth perspectives. The results of the translation are sources to draw a strategic relationship map in the next stage.
Figure 1	The research method framework
The main purpose of this step is to identify the appropriate KPIs corresponding with the ACC strategic objectives. According to the characteristics of an effective KPI which were proposed by Isˇoraite˙ (2004), 27 preliminary KPIs were identified through SWOT analysis results and executive interviews. Based on the BSC framework, strategic objectives and preliminary KPIs were arranged in the area of each perspective. This resulted in a strategic map (Figure2) which helps the relative management identify relationships in terms of cause and effect between KPIs and company objectives (Chaichan, 2002). In the strategic map, KPIs must display a direct or indirect relationship with strategic objectives, and they must respond to strategy and overall mission of the organization (Welker, 2002). Based on the strategic map, managers identified and eliminated KPIs that had no relation to corporate strategic performance, as well as adding other KPIs.
In order to maximize their reliability, KPIs were thoroughly verified so that only validated KPIs were used for measuring the strategic performance. Since the interviews are suitable for differing information requirements (Crouch and Housden, 2003), semi-structured interviews were carried out to evaluate the degree of applicability and importance of each KPI. The validated KPIs must obtain agreement of at least 50% on applicability to measure the strategic performance. Table2 presents 30 validated KPIs in which three KPIs are added by interviewees who were top and middle managers of ACC. It is important to identify the weight of each KPI contribution to each perspective. The weight is mainly derived from respondents’ perception regarding the importance of each KPI (5 is the most important and 1 is the least important).
Measuring the business strategic performance
KPI data collection is an initial activity of this step. The verification of each validated KPI by type of data, source of data, and data formulation is a top priority in order to gain meaningful data. The interviews with the managers of all departments were conducted to get the consultation about verifying KPIs. Moreover, in order to raise the effectiveness of the data collection, the data collection method of each validated KPI was evaluated by the management of ACC. Three ways of data collection are personal interviews, company documentations, and project site recording. Based on the collected data, two top managers were asked to evaluate each KPI using a five-point Likert-type score (55excellent, 45good, 35moderate, 25poor, and 15very poor). Evaluators applied an external benchmarking approach to evaluate KPIs and then identify what should be improved. Since external benchmarking is the comparison with competitors in the same industry (Kozak and Rimmington, 1998), evaluators were asked to identify their competitors. Two competitors are the Construction Corporation 4 (CC4) and the AnGiang Real Estate Company (AREC).
Fortunately, the vice directors of each competitor agreed to take part in interviews for data collection. During the evaluation process, appraisers had to analyse and evaluate through their personal judgements of some KPIs with no available data.
Table 1	SWOT matrix of AnGiang Construction Company (ACC) (adapted from Lee and Ko, 2000)
Board of directors having experience, good relations with customers
Backward technology and equipment
The company has fine goodwill
Lack of comprehensive measures to manage for the overall operation of the company
The company has the competitive advantage on bidding prices
Lack of promising technical personnel
The technical staff have several years of experience in civil works
Ineffective utilization of invested capital
Opportunity (O)
An increase in the invested capital of all sectors
Keep and radically exploit the traditional market (O1, O2, S1, S2,
Equip modern construction machines in order to meet customer needs
The high growth rate of
Expand the business to other regions and segmentations (O1, O2, O3,
Develop quality management system (QMS) and total quality management
Legal modifications relating the construction industry
Draw competent human resources and speed up in-house training
Improve management of receivable accounts (O1, O2, O3, W4)
Threats (T)
Late payments for completed works by owners
Unsound competitions in construction bidding
Extreme competitiveness in the construction market T4: The growth of private construction firms
Step up marketing and advertising activities (T1, T3, S1, S2,
Carefully evaluate customers to avoid projects with the unavailable budget
F5Financial perspective, C5Customer perspective, I5Internal process perspective, L5Learning and grow perspective.
The corporate performance analysis is the next activity to analyse the strategic performance and to identify the strengths and weaknesses of ACC. According to the mark and the weight of each KPI, the performance scale of ACC was calculated based on the performance scale of each KPI. Adopting previous studies (Chaichan, 2002; Khanh, 2005), five levels of the performance scale are: (1) 40% or less for very poor; (2) 40% to 60% for poor; (3) 60% to 80% for moderate; (4) 80% to 90% for good; and (5) 90% or more for very good.
Results and discussion
SWOT matrix of the AnGiang Construction Company (ACC)
The sources for identifying strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats of the SWOT matrix came from significant factors that affected ACC’s performance. As shown in Table1, the significant strengths of ACC were its chief executive officers (CEOs) with wide experience and close customer relations. Owing to the distinct characteristics of the VCM, the role of CEOs is more important to achieve success in construction firms. Since the Vietnamese government investment in the construction sector has reached approximately 35% of GDP for the whole fiveyear period 2001–05 (Cao, 2006), the Vietnamese government is the biggest customer of the construction industry. Thus a close relationship of CEOs with governmental institutions will help construction firms gain competitive advantages over others. In contrast, the significant weaknesses of ACC were: obsolete technology and equipment, and lack of comprehensive measures to manage for the overall operation of the company.
A significant threat of ACC is late payments by owners for completed contract works. As in most developing countries, large projects in Vietnam are financed through government agencies’ funds;
Figure 2 The strategic relationship map of AnGiang Construction Company (ACC)
payment for accomplished works is usual. This situation originates from bureaucracy in government departments and has a considerable negative impact on contractors. Regular monthly payment to contractors for work done will help them to meet project objectives (Frimpong et al., 2003). Moreover, complex payment procedures of local authorities are the main reason for corruption in construction bidding—a significant threat influencing the success of contractors. The high growth rate of GDP together with an increase in growth rates of all economic sectors in the past five years (Mai, 2006) resulted in enormous demand for the construction industry. In addition, Vietnam is creating a favourable economic environment to boost the confidence of foreign investors in Vietnam’s potential. As a result, an increase in the invested capital of all sectors is a significant opportunity for contractors.
The strategic performance analysis
Table3 presents ACC’s performance, its competitors’ record and the performance scale of each perspective and KPI. The performance analysis indicated that ACC’s financial performance is poor (59.16%) because the performance of ‘percentage of management cost from revenue’ (F-03) and ‘Percentage of loan interest from profit’ (F-04) are poor and very poor. Since F-04 has a large weight, very poor performance of F-04 brings about poor financial performance.
According to Table3, the average performance of the customer perspective is moderate (75.70%). Three KPIs reaching good levels are C-03, C-04 and C-06. Though, only ‘Quantitative rate of successful tenders at outside of AGP’ (C-02) and ‘Degree of customer satisfaction on the schedule’ (C-05) obtain the moderate level whereas ‘Value rate of successful tender at outside of AGP’ (C-01) gains a poor level.
Table3 indicates that the level of performance of KPIs such as I-02, I-05, I-09, I-10, I-11, I-12 is very good. However, moderate performance of KPIs such as I-04, I-06, I-07, I-08, and I-13, together with poor performance of ‘Percentage of equipment investment from revenue’ (I-01) and ‘Degree of effect on receivable-account management’ (I-03) consequently caused the moderate performance (71.39%) of the internal business process perspective.
The performance of the learning and growth perspective, as shown in the Table3, only obtains the moderate level (62.68%) due to the moderate performance of most of KPIs except for good performance (80%) of ‘Degree of in-house training of workers’
In fact, the overall performance of ACC has only gained the moderate level (68.34%). The customer, internal business process and learning perspectives have moderate performance whereas financial perspective is at the poor level. This leads CEOs of ACC to see the bad aspects in the corporate strategic performance rather than information from traditional measures such as financial measurement. The appropriate solutions for performance improvements can come from above poor performance.
Cause-and-effect relationship among KPIs
Six cause-and-effect relationships among KPIs, which can be used as sources for strategic performance improvements, were uncovered. The following is a discussion of six identified relationships:
(1) Since the application degree of information technology (IT) to construction site management (L-06) has obtained 50%, there were problems such as: providing materials overestimates; overpayment for completed works; wasting time for summary, report preparation; reflecting no on-time performance
Source of data
Formulation of KPI
Percentage of profits from revenue
Accounting department
The growth rate of annual revenue
Accounting department
(Revenue yearn – Revenue yearn-1)/Revenue
Percentage of management costs from revenue
Percentage of loan interest from profits
Accounting department
Customer perspective
C-01	Value rate of successful tender at outside of AnGiang province (AGP)
Value of successful tenders in outside of
AGP/Total value of successful tenders
(only for 2005)
C-02	Quantitative rate of successful tenders at outside of AGP
Number of successful tenders in outside of AGP/
Total value of successful tenders (only for 2005)
C-03* Percentage of successful tenders from revenue
C-04	Degree of discounting bid prices
Board of directors
C-05	Degree of customer satisfaction on construction schedule
Owners, authorities and consultant firms
C-06	Degree of quality on finished products
Owners, authorities and consultant firms
rocess perspective
Accounting department
Degree of effect on bid activities
Board of directors
Degree of effect on receivable-account management
Board of directors
Percentage of marketing costs from revenue
Accounting department
Marketing costs/Annual revenue
Degree of on-time material provision
Board of directors
Degree of effect on construction costs at sites
Board of directors
Percentage of construction time variance
(Actual–Contractual) working time/The
contractual working time
Time to prepare completed change orders
Board of directors
Degree of safety management performance at sites
Owners, authorities and consultant firms
Average of respondents’ score through five-scale questionnaire survey
Owners, authorities and consultant firms
Degree of on-time repairing construction defects
Owners, authorities and consultant firms
Degree of assigning tasks appropriately

Degree of updating professional knowledge

Learning and growth perspective
L-01	Professional employee rate
Number of employees who had more than five years’ experience/Total number of technical employees
L-02	Degree of the training of promising personnel Board of directors
Personal interview and company record
L-03	Degree of in-house training of workers
Personal interview
L-04	Percentage of high-educational employees
Number of employees who had undergraduate degree/Total number of employees
L-05	Acquiring new technology for construction management (CM)
Board of directors
Personal interview and company record
L-06	Acquiring information technology (IT) for

Board of directors
Personal interview and company record
L-07	Percentage increasing of employees’ salary
Accounting department
Company record
Table 2	The profile of KPIs: sources of data and formulation
Customer perspective
C-01	Value rate of successful tender at outside of AGP	14–17%	,3%	4.76%	2.5
C-04	Degree of discounting bid prices
C-05	Degree of customer satisfaction on the schedule
C-06	Degree of quality on finished products
Internal process perspective
I-02	Degree of effect on bidding activities
I-03	Degree of effect on receivable-account management
I-04	Percentage of marketing costs from revenue
I-05	Degree of on-time material provision
I-06	Degree of effect on construction costs at sites
I-07	Percentage of construction time variance
I-08	Time for to prepare completed change orders
I-11	Degree of on-time repairing construction defects
I-12	Degree of assigning tasks appropriately
I-13	Degree of updating professional knowledge
Learning and growth perspective
L-02	Degree of the training of promising personnel
L-03	Degree of in-house training of workers
L-04	Percentage of high-educational employees
L-05	Acquiring new technology for construction management
L-07	Percentage increasing of employees’ salary
The overall strategic performance of the AnGiang Construction Company (ACC)5
at construction sites. Those problems meant that ‘Degree of effect on cost control at sites’ (I-06) only gained the moderate performance level and then made an increase in management cost and interest.
(2) The performance analysis revealed a low rate of capable employees (L-01) who have more than five years of construction experience as well as undergraduate level (L-04), and poor training of middle managers (L-02). The aforementioned poor performance reflected incompetent human resource which brought about improper planning and scheduling, poor site management, improper materials procurement, slow decision making at sites, lack of cooperation between parties. These factors resulted in an increase of time overrun (I-07) and thus ‘Degree of customer satisfaction on construction schedule’ (C-05) is low. As a result, losing prestige and declining revenue growth are possible.
(3) The poor performance of human resource (L-01, L-02 and L-03) is also responsible for the moderate performance of ‘Time to prepare completed change orders’ (I-08). In addition, the wasted time preparing and correcting change of orders had an influence on the performance of ‘Degree of effect on receivableaccount management’ (I-03) and on the increase of interest, so it resulted in the poor performance of ‘Percentage of loan interest from profits’ (F-04).
(4) Moreover, the poor performance of I-03 also came from reasons such as late checking for completed works leading to delay in payment, lack of commitment on accounts receivable, taking contracts under owner’s financial difficulties. Eventually, loan interest has a considerable increase.
(5) ‘Percentage of equipment investments from revenue’ (I-01) gained a poor level of performance. A possible explanation is the use of defective equipment at sites. ACC bought almost no new equipment during the past three years. This resulted in construction time overrun, poor project quality, declining revenue growth and losing prestige.
(6) The moderate performance of ‘Percentage of marketing costs from revenue’ (I-04) brought about the poor performance of ‘Value rate of successful tender at outside of AnGiang province AGP’ (C-01) during the past three years. ACC shows excessive interest in traditional customers, and thus pays less attention to marketing and brand management.
new customers is not much observed in the ACC strategy. On the other hand, gradual market penetration of its competitors is one of the main causes of ACC’s low rate of revenue growth.
The above relationships imply that the performance of a KPI in a perspective can have an influence on performance of other KPIs in other perspectives and on the overall performance of the construction firm.
Appropriate solutions for improving strategic performance
In order to determine appropriate solutions for improving the overall performance of ACC, KPIs were labelled by their performance scales: less than 70% was labelled as weak; 70% to 79% as average; and over 80% as strong. The sources identifying which performance needs to improve can come from 17 identified KPIs with the weak label. According to the performance analysis and the ‘cause and effect’ relationships among KPIs, there are 26 preliminary solutions for strategic performance improvements classified into six groups, namely organizational structure and human resources; management model at sites; innovation of site management procedures; financial management; marketing operations; and equipment management. Since too many solutions could lead to ineffective execution of the work, crucial solutions had to come from refining preliminary solutions through interviewing two top managers. The effective evaluation matrix proposed by Lee and Ko (2000) was adopted to elicit which solutions would be the most effective. Rows of the matrix are KPIs with the weak label, and columns are preliminary solutions. Respondents were asked to give the score on effective levels for each solution over weak labels using the following scores: ‘considerably effective’ was scored as 9; ‘more effective’ as 6; ‘effective’ as 3; ‘somewhat effective’ as 1; and ‘not effective’ as 0. The effective level (EL) of each solution was computed using the following equation:
where Ei5the effective level of the ith solution; I5the index of solutions; Mik5the effective score of the ith solution to the kth weak label; k5the index of weak labels; n5total number of weak labels (n517), N5total number of solutions (N526).
The evaluation process resulted in 11 most effective solutions (Table4) in which the group of solutions
Table 4	Most appropriate solutions to overcome weaknesses in strategic performance
No.	Refined solutions
The organization structure and human resources
Providing the best working conditions for staff
Innovating the organizational structure so as to be more effective
Paying the appropriate salary to attract competent personnel
Offering appropriate training of young staff members at sites
Promoting promising staff members by the appropriate treatment
Improving construction management process at sites
Strictly applying QMS at all levels of the company
Clearly stipulating obligations, benefits and duties of each member of staff
Frequent training of onsite staff in construction management procedures
Setting up a taskforce for checking the quality and the schedule in order to raise the management efficiency
Establishing an alternative that can deliver materials on time
Setting up a specialized team to check payments and completed works
Setting up a special group to undertake quality control and warranty of works
The management model at construction sites
13	Diversifying the forms of subcontract
14	Promoting a form of direct administration from the company for construction works
15*	Applying information technology for construction cost control
16	Issuing the rules of terms of advanced payments.
17	Stepping up strict control of indirect costs
18	Setting up a specialized team to recover all debts
19	Timely payment to subcontractors for completed works
Marketing activities
20	Fostering the spread of the brand name at trade fairs
21	Setting up company branches at other provinces
22	Setting up a specialized group for marketing activities
Giving financial support to small business units (SBU) to purchase new construction equipment
Purchasing construction equipment that the company is deficient in
Planning for effective maintenance of construction equipment
1*, 2*, 3*, 4*, 5*, 6*, 7*, 8*, 9*, 15*, and 23* are the 11 most effective solutions.
relating to the innovation of site management procedures is significant (24.4%), followed by those relating to the organizational structure and human resources (23.8%). Accordingly, the CEOs approved 11 aforementioned solutions as a guideline for strategic performance improvements.
The fluctuation of the construction market including unforeseen difficulties and risks brought opportunities and threats to construction firms. Strategic management may be a critical way to cope with the circumstances. However, in developing countries construction firms seems to put fewer efforts into strategic management because of lack of effective tools and unawareness of strategic measures. The major objective of this paper is to describe how the BSC and SWOT matrix can be used to formulate business strategies and to measure the strategic performance of construction. AnGiang Construction Company (ACC) is selected as a case study for measuring strategic performance. A benchmarking approach was applied to compare ACC’s performance with its competitors’ best practices for improvement.
The results indicated that only the financial perspective came within the poor performance level, whereas the moderate level is typical for the customer, learning and growth, and internal process perspectives. In addition, the findings imply that poor human resource management and ineffective site management are generally the ‘Achilles’ heel’ of construction firms in Vietnam and very likely in other developing countries. The findings from the case study may benefit not only Vietnamese construction firms but also firms in other developing countries in order to identify their strategies, quantify strategic performance, and improve their competitive advantage.
The findings also indicated that better management of receivable accounts, careful evaluation of the financial capacity of owners, and effective training of the in-house personnel are meaningful factors for measuring strategic performance. To deal with severe competition in the construction market of developing countries, these factors may be overlooked when construction firms formulate their strategies using pure SWOT analysis. Therefore, the BSC-oriented SWOT analysis can provide a basic framework to identify the meaningful SWOT factors for strategic performance measurement. In addition, poor performance of the studied company in managing receivable accounts and acquiring information technology for construction management reflected that several inappropriate strategies developed before the application of BSCoriented SWOT analysis may cause potential threats to its sustainable development. The integration of the BSC approach and SWOT analysis can help construction firms in developing countries to identify short-term objectives and long-term strategies, establish the performance measurement system, quantify strategic performance, and improve their competitive advantage. A SWOT analysis and BSC framework are popular with all companies in developed countries whereas both methods are rarely used in developing countries. A possible explanation is that CEOs of construction companies in developing countries recognize no benefits from SWOT analysis and BSC. As competition in the construction market increases, top managers of those companies often face somewhat urgent problems related to the company’s existence rather than strategic management. In this context, the findings from this case study provide valuable lessons for practitioners in the application of new management frameworks (i.e. BSC and SWOT) in managing their strategic performance in other developing countries and regions.
Although extensive efforts have been made, the limitations of the study are unavoidable. The sample size should be larger when measuring the performance of customer satisfaction. Two competitors identified by directors of the company may mean that other potential competitors were overlooked. Thus, other approaches should be integrated to determine all competitors. Future studies should apply the proposed conceptual framework to other construction firms so that the combined SWOT analysis and BSC approach can prove its usefulness in strategic performance improvements. Moreover, the following recommendations may be useful with other companies to apply the BSC concept. First, strong top management commitment is required for the verification of the vision and strategies. Secondly, strong commitment from the management team is also required so that data collection methods can be carefully reviewed and revised. Finally, reasonable time is required to collect appropriate raw data.
