Significant factors causing delay in the UAE construction industry
To cite this article: Arshi Shakeel Faridi & Sameh Monir El‐Sayegh (2006) Significant factors causing delay in the UAE construction industry, Construction Management and Economics, 24: 11, 1167-1176, DOI: 10.1080/01446190600827033
To link to this article:
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
Construction Management and Economics (November 2006) 24, 1167–1176
Significant factors causing delay in the UAE construction industry
ARSHI SHAKEEL FARIDI1 and SAMEH MONIR EL-SAYEGH2*
American University of Sharjah, Department of Engineering Systems and Management, Sharjah, United Arab
American University of Sharjah, Department of Civil Engineering, Sharjah 26666, United Arab Emirates
Received 14 September 2005; accepted 23 May 2006
Construction delay is considered one of the most recurring problems in the construction industry. Delays have an adverse impact on project success in terms of time, cost, quality and safety. The effects of construction delays are not confined to the construction industry only, but influence the overall economy of a country like UAE, where construction plays a major role in its development and contributes 14% to the GDP. Thus, it is essential to define the most significant causes of delay in order to avoid or minimise their impact on construction projects. A detailed questionnaire was developed and used to get input from professionals associated with the UAE construction industry. The perspective of contractors and consultants has been analysed to rank the causes of delays based on their Relative Importance Index. Contractors and consultants were in agreement on the most significant causes of delays. The research revealed that 50% of the construction projects in UAE encounter delays and are not completed on time. The top 10 most significant causes of construction delays have been identified by this research. Approval of drawings, inadequate early planning and slowness of the owners’ decision-making process are the top causes of delay in the UAE construction industry.
Delay, project management, project controls, time, UAE
Introduction
Construction delay is considered one of the most recurring problems in the construction industry. Delays adversely impact on project stakeholders including owners, design professionals, construction professionals, users and others. The key objectives of construction projects are time, cost, quality and safety. These objectives are jeopardised by delays. Delays result in extension of project time, which leads to extra overheads that increase the cost. Delay is a serious problem that has to be dealt with in any construction project. Thus, it is important to identify the most significant causes of delay in the UAE construction industry to be able to find ways to avoid them, or at least, mitigate their impact.
The United Arab Emirates (UAE) construction industry has reached an unparalleled position in the last decade. Since the discovery of oil, in the late 1960s,
the construction industry started to grow to meet the increasing demand for shelter, offices, electricity, roads among others. The real boom, though, started in the mid-1990s with the shift from an oil-dependent country to a more industrial, commercial and tourism hub. The growth is initiated by the public sector but the private sector is as active. The Emirate of Dubai is now being credited with the highest per square kilometre of construction activity in the world. Dubai’s key role in the recent expansion of construction activity in the Gulf is obvious: of the $50billion estimated Gulf-wide building spends, 60% of that, about $30billion is in the UAE alone; and the majority of that is in Dubai (ITP Construction, 2004). Table1 shows the key facts about the UAE construction industry.
Much emphasis is now placed on projects to be completed within the specified project duration due to the current trend of shifting most projects towards the fast track approach. This has led to the need to pinpoint exactly the relevant causes of delay that have to be monitored during the entire phases of the project
*Author for correspondence. selsayegh@aus.edu
to complete the project on time. Construction projects
Construction Management and Economics
ISSN 0144-6193 print/ISSN 1466-433X online # 2006 Taylor & Francis
Table 1	Key facts about UAE and the UAE construction industry
Construction industry’s contribution to GDP
Total no. of contractors
Total no. of employees in construction industry
340,000 (16.5% of the total work force)
Value of ongoing construction projects
World’s tallest tower, world’s biggest mall, and world’s biggest man made island
Compiled from Gulf News (2005), ITP Construction (2004), Dubai Economic Department (DED) (2005), UAE Interact (2004).
do not suffer delays only during one time period or phase of the project, but during all phases (Al-Saggaf, 1998). It becomes essential to the interests of all parties that delays, or their effects, are reduced. Even quite small advances in the recovery of a delayed schedule are likely to have a significant impact on the financial returns of those involved. Since delay is associated with cost and time overrun, the causes of delay have been a matter of concern for construction professionals and a
topic of study for researchers. There has been some research carried out in the past to find out the causes of delays for construction projects of different countries based on the requirements of the region, time, classifications, responsibilities, etc.
Assaf et al. (1995) surveyed the causes of delay in large building construction projects in the Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia as seen by contractors, architect/engineers and owners. Ogunlana et al. (1996) identified and studied the causes of delay for construction projects in Bangkok. Kaming et al. (1997) identified many variables that have an impact on construction time and cost overruns in Indonesia. Mezher and Tawil (1998) surveyed randomly selected owners, contractors and architects from Lebanon to find out the main causes of delays from the preidentified causes and their groups. Kumaraswami and Chan (1998) also studied the causes of construction delays for Hong Kong. Al-Moumani (2000) conducted a quantitative analysis of construction delays in Jordan. He investigated various causes of delays on 130 public projects in Jordan that were constructed during the period 1990–97. Research conducted by Frimpong and Oluwoye (2003) revealed that financing, natural conditions and materials-related factors contributed mainly to the delay of groundwater projects in Ghana. Odeh and Battaineh (2002) studied the causes of delays in traditional contracts. As for delay analysis, many authors, Alkass et al. (1996), Ng et al. (2004) and Shi et al. (2001), recommended different techniques.
Time is money, and timing is an integral part of every construction plan and can affect each party’s contractual obligations. The time allowed for construction performance is an important consideration for both the project contractor and the project owner. Since delay is costly for all the parties involved in the construction industry, it must be identified and its causes should be addressed. The main objective of this research is to identify and rank the significant causes of delay in the UAE construction industry based on their Relative Importance Index (RII) from the perspective of the construction industry’s main participants—contractors and consultants. Further, 10 most significant causes of delays for the construction projects in UAE are specified based on the overall analysis. These 10 most significant causes of delays are then compared with significant causes of delays in Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (Assaf et al., 1995) and Lebanon (Mezher and Tawil, 1998).
Causes of construction delays
Various causes of construction delays were identified in the first stage of the research through a literature review and personal interviews with many construction professionals associated with the UAE construction industry. Forty-four major causes of construction delays were found to have an impact on the UAE construction industry. These causes of delay were then structured to develop a detailed survey questionnaire. The causes are grouped into eight practical categories. The contractor’s group consists of causes of delays which are mainly originated by contractors. This includes the availability of resources, supervision and experience. Three most important resources for any construction project are manpower, materials and machines. Contractors have to ensure that all these resources are available throughout the project whenever needed. Causes such as skill and the productivity of manpower, productivity, availability and the reliability of machines/ equipment affect the project at each and every stage of its construction. Contractors’ experience and their supervision also have great impacts on the project. Any of these causes can delay a construction project if not incorporated in the project planning, scheduling and controlling programme.
The causes within the consultant’s category are related to the designs, drawings, inspection and quality control. Owing to the nature of a construction project, it has to deal with many changes in drawings/specifications, materials, etc. Consultants are the ones who are held responsible for these causes. The owner’s involvement in the construction project varies significantly depending on the project and the contract type. In all cases, there are many causes of delays which originate from the owner. One important cause is the owner’s slow decision-making process. Other causes of delays are the change of materials type and specification, excessive bureaucracy and the unrealistic contract duration imposed by the owner.
Other causes of delays are related to finance, for which both the owner and contractor are responsible. These causes play very important role in the smooth running of the project activities and the completion of the project on time. Causes related to the contractual relationship, planning and scheduling are vital for many projects. All the parties involved in a construction project are responsible for their respective roles at
different stages of the project. This starts right from the conceptual stage till the finishing stage. All the important causes related to these issues have also been identified and included in the questionnaire.
The planning and scheduling of any construction project depends heavily on the local government regulations. On many occasions contractors, consultants and owners need to study various services (underground/over ground), such as telecommunication cables, water/electricity/gas lines, etc. before they start the construction. It depends on the location of project also. Permits and approvals are required in most cases. Construction participants must be aware of these regulations and estimate the requirement of time and effort for this. There are some causes of delays over which no party has any control. One of these causes for UAE is the weather conditions, which are extreme.
The questionnaire survey forms were distributed to 400 randomly selected construction professionals associated with the UAE construction industry to get their responses. The number of contractors in the UAE is
Out of these, 12,000 are active. However, this number includes all contractors and a large portion is small contractors and specialty contractors. The chosen sample represents the large and medium size general construction contractors, consultants and owners that are active in the UAE. The completed responses were collected either personally, or received through regular postal mails, e-mails and faxes. A total of 105 responses were received, thus a response rate of 27% was achieved. This included 52 from contractors, 46 from the consultants and seven from the owners. Since the data (seven responses) from the owners were not sufficient, these were not included for the analysis. Ninety-three out of 98 responses (from contractors and consultants) were complete and used in the analysis. Out of those respondents, 47 had experience of more than 10 years, 32 respondents had experience between five and 10 years whereas only 14 professionals had experience less than five years. One of the strategically asked questions from these construction professionals through this questionnaire revealed that 50% of the UAE construction projects are delayed.
Statistical methods of analysis
The Relative Importance Index was used to analyse these causes of delays. Equation(1) was used to compute the Relative Importance Index (RII) for all the causes.

Wi5Weight assigned to ith response; Wi53, 2, 1 and 0 for i51, 2, 3 and 4
respectively;
Xi5Frequency of the ith response; i5Response category index51, 2, 3 and 4 for Very important, Important, Less important, and Not important respectively.
Accordingly, W153 for Very important, W252 for Important, W351 for Less important, and W450 for Not important have been used for this analysis.
To study the strength of relationship between two sets of ranking, the Spearman rank correlation coefficient was determined. The Spearman rank correlation coefficient is calculated using equation(2) (Kottegoda.
and Rosso, 1997):

rs5Spearman rank correlation coefficient; d5Difference in ranking between contractors and consultants; N5Number of variables (causes)544.
The higher the value of rs (approaching 1 or 21) indicates a strong association between the two sets of ranking (Odeh and Battaineh, 2002).
Ranking based on contractors’ and consultants’ perspectives
Contractors and consultants are the two main participants of construction projects. The data were first analysed based on the perspectives of contractors and consultants separately.
The frequency of each of the above responses (Very Important, Important, Less Important, and Not Important) for the individual causes of delays have been compiled from the 93 responses. Using equation(1), weights and the compiled frequencies, the RII of all these causes has been computed, and is shown in Table2 along with the corresponding ranking. From the analysis of the results, it is found that preparation and approval of drawings, inadequate early planning of the project and slowness of the owner’s decisionmaking process are ranked high by both contractors and consultants. Preparation and approval of drawings, productivity of manpower and unsuitable leadership style of construction/project manager have been given almost same ranking by contractors and consultants.
Although the contractors and consultants agreed on most of the factors, there were some disagreements. Shortage of materials on site is ranked much higher (Rank 5) by the contractors whereas this was ranked lower (Rank 16) by the consultants. Financing by the contractor during construction was ranked much higher (Rank 3) by the consultants as compared to that by the contractors (Rank 14).
To study the strength of relationship between these two sets of ranking (based on contractors and consultants), a further analysis was done to find the agreement between contractors and consultants on these rankings using the Spearman rank correlation coefficient (equation(2)). The Spearman rank correlation coefficient is found to be 0.855 for these research data. This higher value of rs (approaching 1) indicates a strong agreement between contractors and consultants for the ranking of the causes of delays.
Ranking based on the respondent’s years of experience in the UAE construction industry
The UAE construction industry has attracted construction professionals from around the world with varying numbers of years’ experience. Therefore, further analysis has been done for these data based on the respondent’s years of experience in the UAE construction industry. For this purpose, these respondents are classified into three categories. The first category consists of the construction professionals having experience greater than 10 years, whereas the second category includes the professionals having experience between five and 10 years. The third category that includes professionals with less than five years’ experience was not considered in the comparison because of the small number of respondents (,30).
The analysis showed that the rankings of the causes of delays are almost similar based on the perspective of both categories of respondents (based on their years of experience). The top 10 causes of delays according to the construction professionals having experience between five and 10 years falls within the overall top 10. Whereas based on the construction professionals having experience greater than 10 years, seven of the top 10 causes of delays are among the overall top 10 causes of delays (Table2).
The Spearman rank correlation coefficient for the above data (using equation(2)) is found to be 0.914. This higher value of rs (approaching 1) indicates a strong agreement between these two categories of professionals.
It is remarkable to note that productivity of manpower, poor supervision and poor site management are ranked much higher by the construction professionals having experience between five and 10 years as compared to lower rank by construction professionals having experience of more than 10 years. People with more experience consider inadequate early planning of the project and the unsuitable leadership of the project/ construction manager as major causes of construction delays in the UAE.
The collected data were statistically analysed further to determine the overall Relative Importance Index (RII) of these 44 causes of delays. The results are shown in Table2. The analysis of the data shows that the preparation and approval of drawings has been ranked highest by the respondents for which the consultant/ designer is responsible. This is followed by inadequate early planning of the project, slowness of the owner’s decision-making process, shortage of manpower, poor supervision, and poor site management, productivity of manpower, skill of manpower, non-availability of materials on time, obtaining permit/approval from the municipality/different government authorities and the financing by contractor during construction.
The 10 most significant causes of delay for the UAE construction projects are shown in Table3 along with their RII values. It is observed that, out of the top 10 most significant causes of delay, five causes fall under the category of contractor which implies that contractors can be held responsible for the delay of the project due to those
Table 2	Summary of Relative Importance Index and rank for the causes of delays
S.No	Category	Causes of delay	Contractors	Consultants	5–10 years >10 years	Overall
Shortage of manpower
Productivity of manpower
Shortage of materials on site
Non-availability of materials on time
Shortage of equipment
Failure/breakdown of equipment
Defective work
Construction method
Construction mistakes
Poor supervision and poor site management
Delay in subcontractor’s work
Necessary variations
Poor control of site resource allocation
Unsuitable leadership style of construction/project manager
Delay in special manufactured imported
Preparation and approval of drawings
Waiting time for sample/ materials approval
Waiting time for site inspection and approval of quality control tests/results
Change in specifications
Incomplete drawings/ specifications/documents
Design error due to unfamiliarity with the local conditions, environment, and the materials
Slowness of the owner’s decision-making process
Materials type and specification change during the construction
Excessive bureaucracy/ uncooperative owner
Unrealistic contract duration imposed by

Financial	Financing by contractor during construction
Delays in contractor’s progress payment (of completed work) by owner
Late payment to subcontractor by the main contractor
Planning and Inadequate early planning of scheduling the project
Lack of data in estimating the activitydurationandresources
Overestimation of the productivity
Inadequate progress review
Unavailability of the construction/project
the project
Contractual relationship
Lack of communication and coordination between the partiesinvolvedinconstruction (contractor–subcontractor– consultant–owner)
Obtaining permit/approval fromthemunicipality/different government authorities.
Unforeseen conditions
Weather conditions (mainly high temperature)
Table 3 Ten most significant causes of delays in the UAE causes. Shortage of resources is also found to be a major construction industry factor contributing to the delay. Shortage of manpower,
Causes of delay
Preparation and approval of drawings
Inadequate early planning of the project
Slowness of the owner’s decision-making process
Shortage of manpower
Productivity of manpower
Skill of manpower
Non-availability of materials on time
Obtaining permit/approval from the municipality/different government authorities
Financing by contractor during construction
productivity of manpower and the skill of manpower are among the 10 most significant causes of delays.
The analysis of the data shows that based on contractors’ points of view, eight of the top 10 causes of delays are from the overall top 10 causes of delays. Whereas all the top 10 causes of delays based on consultants’ perspectives are found to be among the overall top 10 causes. The comparative profiles of 10 most significant causes of delays in terms of their rank and RII are shown in Figure1 and Figure2.
Although some of the major causes of delays for the UAE construction industry follow the same trend as found in earlier research (such as preparation and approval of drawings, financing, etc.), it is found that the productivity, skill and the shortage of manpower have emerged as the major causes of delays now.
Figure 1 Comparative profiles of overall 10 most significant causes of delays in terms of RII with respect to contractors and consultants
Figure 2 Comparative profiles of overall 10 most significant causes of delays in terms of RII with respect to the
respondent’s years of experience
causes related to proper communications were some of the major causes of delays based on earlier research, these are not the major causes of delays at present for UAE construction. It is also observed that most of these top 10 causes of delays are experienced during the construction phase.
Comparative study
For a fair comparison, it was essential to correlate similar causes of delays for UAE, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA) and Lebanon, and synchronise them to do the comparative study so that each of the significant causes reflects the most representative cause of delays for all the three countries. This was necessary because each of the researchers had identified the causes of delay based on the local conditions and the prevailing problems. A similar study was done for the construction industry of Eastern province of Saudi Arabia (Assaf et al., 1995) and for Lebanon (Mezher and Tawil, 1998). The causes of delays, their ranking, analysis, and the results of the above-mentioned two pieces of research were studied carefully, to extract the rank of the causes of delay corresponding to the causes of delay in the UAE construction industry.
It is observed that only three of the top 10 causes of delays of KSA are found to be significant for the UAE construction industry as per the contractors (Table4) as well as consultants (Table5). These three causes from KSA are preparation and approval of drawings, slowness of the owner’s decision-making process and non-availability of the materials on time. The remaining top seven causes of delays for the UAE construction industry have been ranked comparatively lower in KSA. Some of the other causes of delay in UAE, like obtaining permit/approval from the municipality/different government authorities (Rank 7) and productivity of manpower (Rank 8) which are found to be very important, are almost of no concern (Rank 49 and 55 respectively) for the contractors of KSA. On the other hand, slowness of the owner’s decision-making process and financing by the contractor during construction have been ranked higher (Rank 2) by the consultants of KSA, and are in line with the consultants of UAE who have given a similar ranking for above two causes. Delays in contractor’s progress payment (of completed work) by owner is also a cause of concern for the consultants of both the countries. Again, the productivity of manpower, which is among the most significant causes of delay in UAE as per the consultants’
Table 4	Contractors’ perspective: ranking of 10 most significant causes of delays in UAE and their corresponding ranking in KSA and Lebanon
Causes of delays	Rank as per contractors’ perspective
Inadequate early planning of the project
Preparation and approval of drawings
Slowness of the owner’s decision-making process
Shortage of materials on site
Conflict between contractor and the consultant
Obtaining permit/approval from the municipality/different government authorities
Lack of communication and coordination between the parties involved in construction (contractor–subcontractor–consultant–owner)
Productivity of manpower
Shortage of manpower
Incomplete drawings/specifications/documents
Unsuitable leadership style of construction/project manager
Non-availability of materials on time
perspective, also, has been of no concern (Rank 49) for KSA construction industry.
These discrepancies in the ranking for the productivity of manpower for these two countries may be due to the fact that the construction industry of KSA is well established whereas the UAE construction industry is still on the learning curve. As the culture and the working environment for both the countries are similar, this is reflected in the form of similar rankings given by the construction professionals from both the countries, for the slowness of the owner’s decision-making process and the preparation and the approval of drawings by the consultants.
A further analysis shows that, as per Lebanon’s contractors’ point of view, only three of the top 10 significant causes of delay are found to be among top 10 causes of construction delays in UAE. Slowness of the owner’s decision-making process, preparation and approval of drawings and obtaining permit/approval from the municipality/different government authorities are the only three causes from Lebanon that are of much concern in UAE also. Besides the above causes, the Lebanon’s consultants, similar to UAE consultants, have ranked unsuitable leadership style of construction/ project manager.
Table 5 Consultants’ perspective: ranking of 10 most significant causes of delays in UAE and their corresponding ranking in KSA and Lebanon
Preparation and approval of drawings
Slowness of the owner’s decision-making process
Financing by contractor during construction
Shortage of manpower
Inadequate early planning of the project
Skill of manpower
Non-availability of materials on time
Productivity of manpower
Poor supervision and poor site management
Obtaining permit/approval from the municipality/different government authorities
Unsuitable leadership style of construction/project manager
Delays in contractor’s progress payment (of completed work) by owner
Again, productivity and the shortage of manpower, which is of great concern for UAE consultants as well as contractors, have been ranked very low by the contractors and the consultants of Lebanon. This is due to the fact that foreign labourers are easily available in Lebanon from the regional and neighbouring countries. Also, there is huge demand on manpower
due to the number and magnitude of current projects. Obtaining permit/approval from the municipality/different government authorities (Rank 9 for UAE) is not significant at all (Rank 47) as per the perspective of Lebanon’s consultants.
A total of 93 construction professionals from the UAE construction industry participated in this study and provided their expert opinion in the form of their response by completing the questionnaire survey. Most of the respondents participating in this research believe that preparation and approval of drawings, slowness of the owner’s decision-making process and inadequate early planning of the project are the major causes of delay in UAE construction projects. Shortage, skill and the productivity of manpower also play a vital role in construction delays. Conflict between contractors and the consultants is a major cause of concern from the contractors’ point of view, where it is fairly insignificant in the overall analysis. Lack of communication and coordination between the parties involved in construction (contractor–subcontractor–consultant–owner) also follows the same trend.
Delay is a major problem in the UAE construction industry and worldwide. Project participants should be familiar with these significant causes of delays and plan to avoid or at least mitigate their impact on project success. Some recommendations that will help the UAE construction professionals in minimising constructions delays and their impacts are presented.
(1) There must be an agreed schedule (between contractors and consultants) for preparation, submittal and approval of drawings which should be strictly followed.
(2) Owners should incorporate requirements for scheduling and schedule control in the contract documents.
(3) There is an urgent need for the involvement of construction management companies to help minimise delays or their impacts.
(4) Better human resource management can help improve labour skills and productivity. Companies should invest in the training and development of their employees.
(5) Contractors need to act early to obtain permits and approvals from the different government agencies.
There is very strong agreement between the contractors and the consultants for some of the most significant causes of delay. Many of the significant causes of construction delays for UAE have turned out to be related to manpower. This may be due to the fact that higher wages (compared to the neighbouring countries) in the UAE construction industry have compelled contractors to curtail this resource to compensate others. It is also found that the culture of supervision, approval and coordination need to be revitalised for the UAE construction industry. The comparative study reveals that the causes of delay for the UAE construction industry vary significantly from the causes of delays for KSA and Lebanon. Most of the top 10 causes of delay for KSA and Lebanon are found to be insignificant for the UAE construction industry except a few causes, like slowness of the owner’s decision-making process and the preparation and approval of drawings.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the editor and the referees for their valuable comments and suggestions to this manuscript. The authors would also like to acknowledge the contribution of Dr M. Gadalla, (American University of Sharjah, UAE) to this research.
