By Zhen Chen,1 Heng Li,2 and Conrad T. C. Wong3
This paper presents a systematic approach to environmental management of pollution and/or hazards caused by urban construction projects in China. It proposes a qualitative approach to assess and control the problem and a method to calculate the construction pollution index (CPI), which provides a quantitative measurement of pollution and/or hazards caused by the urban construction projects. Based on the analysis and discussions, the paper further proposes that major construction companies in China should obtain ISO 14001 Environmental Management System (EMS) certifications. By doing so, the construction companies can integrate the concept of environmental management into their construction management practice.
Pollution and hazards caused by urban civil construction projects have become a serious problem in China. Sources of pollution and hazards from construction sites include dust, harmful gases, noises, blazing lights, solid and liquid wastes, ground movements, messy sites, fallen items, and so forth. These types of pollution and hazards can not only annoy residents nearby, but also affect the health and well-being of people in the entire city. For example, in big cities such as Shanghai and Beijing, air quality has been deteriorating due to extensive urban redevelopment activities (Li 1998).
In order to tackle the problems, the Chinese government has issued a number of laws and acts on environmental protection since the early 1980s. These laws and acts include the Oceanic Environment Act (issued in 1982), Water Pollution Protection Act (issued in 1984), Air Pollution Protection Act (issued in
1987), and Noise Pollution Protection Act (issued in 1989). In 1998, the Ministry of Construction also issued the first construction law that explicitly includes the liabilities and responsibilities of contractors in preventing and reducing the emission of pollutants to the natural environment.
This paper provides a systematic approach to dealing with environmental pollution caused by construction projects. This approach allows for both qualitative analysis and control and quantitative assessments through measuring the construction pollution index (CPI). We believe that the qualitative assessment and control method is useful because it can provide construction project managers with essential knowledge on how to limit environmental pollution to its minimum. The CPI is also necessary as it can be used to quantitatively measure the degree of pollution caused by particular construction projects. The concept of CPI can also help construction project managers to rearrange and revise construction plans and schedules in order to reduce the level of pollution and disturbance.
Sources of pollution and/or hazards from construction activities can be divided into seven major types: dust, harmful gases, noises, solid and liquid wastes, fallen objects, ground movements, and others. In order to reduce and prevent the pollution and hazards, it is necessary to identify the construction operations that generate them. Table 1 lists construction activities that generate pollution and hazards and the corresponding methods for their prevention. The table is based on extensive studies of many construction sites in Shanghai, Beijing, and Hong Kong, as well as numerous discussions with many project managers.
Methods for preventing pollution and hazards can be divided into the following four categories.
This category recommends a range of advanced construction technologies that can reduce the amount of dust, harmful gases, noise, solid and liquid wastes, fallen objects, ground movements, and other sources of pollution and hazards. For example, replacing the impact hammer pile driver with the hydraulic piling machine can significantly reduce the level of noise generated by a piling operation.
This category recommends the use of modern construction management methods that may help reduce the amount of dust, noise, solid and liquid wastes, fallen objects, and other sources of pollution and hazards.
This category emphasizes revising and rearranging construction schedules to reduce the aggregation of pollution and hazards and has an effect on dust, noise, solid and liquid wastes, fallen objects, ground movements, and other sources of pollution and hazards.
Better building material can also help reduce pollution and hazards. This category has an effect on harmful gases, fallen objects, ground movements, and other sources of pollution and hazards.
The four categories of preventive methods and their effects are also summarized in Table 2.
We believe that by adopting the above preventive methods, it is possible to effectively control and reduce the amount of pollution and hazards generated from construction activities. In order to further analyze the effect of pollution and hazards, the next section describes a method to quantify the amount of pollution and hazards generated by a construction project.
Quantitative Analysis of Pollution and Hazards in Urban Construction Projects
As a construction project spans over a year or even longer, the methods for quantitative analysis have to be a continuous monitoring and assessment of the whole project duration.
Causes of Pollution and Hazards and Preventive Methods
Methods to prevent
Open-air rock power and soil
Open-air site and structure
Concrete and mortar making
Static crushing/chemical breaking
Static crushing/chemical breaking/wet excavation/wet drilling
Covering/wet construction
Wet keeping/site clearing/mask
Awning/concrete goods/washing transporting equipment
Concrete goods/packing and awning/wet keeping
Awning/storehouse

Construction machine—electric welder
Construction machine—scraper
Electric welding

Construction machine—rock drill
Construction machine—mixing machinery
Construction machine—cutting machine
Construction machine—scraper
Static crushing/chemical breaking
Static crushing/chemical breaking
Laser cutting machine/prefabricated component/soundproof room
Ground movements

Forced ramming
Static crushing/chemical breaking
Static pressing-in pile
Static compacting
Solid-state waste—building material waste Solid-state waste—building material package
Liquid waste—machinery oil
Prefabricated component/recovery


Liquid waste—construction water
Construction tools—scaffold and board
Construction tools—model plate
Construction tools—building material
Construction tools—sling/others
Recycle of solid waste/technology improvement

Technology improving/recovery

Safety control/reliable tools
Technology improving/safety control
Technology improving/recovery
Safety control

Urban transportation—road encroachment
Civic safety—demolition
Civic safety—tower crane
Civic safety—construction elevator
Civic safety—foundation/earth dam
Enclosing wall/night shift/underground construction
Static crushing/chemical breaking
Safety control
Technology improving/plan preconception
this section, we present a method to quantitatively measure the amount of pollution and hazards generated by a construction project within its project duration. The method sets to measure the construction pollution index (CPI), as shown in (1).
where CPI = construction pollution index of an urban construction project; CPIi = construction pollution index of a specific construction operation i; hi = hazard magnitude per unit of time generated by a specific construction operation i; Di = duration of construction operation I that generates hazard hi; and n = number of construction operations that generate pollution and hazards.
In (1), parameter hi is a relative value indicating the magnitude of a hazard generated by a particular construction operation in a unit of time. Its value is limited in the range of [0,1]. If hi = 1, it means that the hazard can cause fatal damage or catastrophes to people and/or properties nearby. For example, if a construction operation can generate some noise and the sound level at the receiving end exceeds the ‘‘threshold of pain,’’ which is 140 dB (McMullan 1993), then the value of hi for this particular construction operation is 1. If hi = 0, then it indicates that no hazard is detectable from a construction operation. It is possible to identify values of hi for all types of pollution and hazards generated by commonly used construction operations and methods. For example, according to the information on sound emission from piling driven machines, as well as the types of piles, we can formulate the content of Table 3, which contains values of hi for some piling operations.
Information and such data as the emission levels of noise, harmful gases, and wastes are normally available in the spec-
JOURNAL OF CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT / JULY/AUGUST 2000 / 321
Countermeasuresof Construction Pollution in Urban Civil Engineering and Their Effects
lution and Hazards

Technological methods
Managerial methods
Values of hi for Some Piling Operations
Prefabricated concrete piles using drop-hammer driver
Prefabricated concrete piles using hydraulic piling driver
Prefabricated concrete piles using static pressing-in driver
ifications of the relevant construction machinery and plant, or can be conveniently measured. These data can then be converted to hi values by normalizing them into the range of [0,1]. In case no data are available for such conversion, then hi values have to be decided based on users’ experience and expert opinions.
Durations required for completing construction operations are measured in number of days. For example, the Shanghai Maxwell (Fig. 1) construction project involves a piling operation that includes the following activities and durations.
Driving prefabricated concrete piles using drop-hammerdriver (duration 31 days)
Driving sheet steel piles using hydraulic piling driver(duration 57 days)
Then, according to (1), the value of the CPI for the piling operation is 0.5? The overall CPI value for the project is 747.2. The value of the CPI reflects the accumulated amount of pollution and hazards generated during the length of a construction project.
Project Scheduling Together with Environmental Management
It is also very useful to create a CPI bar chart, which is very similar to the ordinary bar charts used in construction scheduling, except that the thickness of the bars represents the hi value for the corresponding construction operation. By integrating the concept of CPI into MS Project, which is a commonly used tool for construction project management, we can develop a system to neatly combine environmental management with project management, as shown in Fig. 1, in which hi values are listed beside their corresponding construction operations. As the height of a bar represents the hi value, the area of the bar represents the CPI value of the construction operation. The aggregation of the thicknesses of bars, as indicated at the bottom of the bar chart, represents the distribution of the CPI value during the whole project. This distribution is particularly useful for project managers to identify the periods when the project will generate the highest amount of pollution and hazards. Therefore, preventive methods such as those listed in Table 1 can be used to reduce the amount of pollution and hazards during those periods. In this example, it can be seen from the distribution diagram in Fig. 1 that, during November to December 1998, the project generated the highest pollution and hazards, mainly because of the large amount of on-site mixing of concrete and masonry works. The project manager foresaw the problem and decided to reduce the amount of on-site mixing concrete in those months by using 25% ready-mixed concrete, which reduced the amount of noise generated from the on-site concrete mixing. This reduced the hi value in November and December 1998 from 3.3 to 2.5, a 25% reduction, which also indicates that the amount of pollution and hazards has been reduced.
So far, a quantitative method for analyzing the magnitude of construction pollution and hazards has been presented. In order to ensure that the concept of environmental management is embedded in the daily practice of construction project management, we propose that major construction companies should obtain ISO 14001 Environmental Management System (EMS) certifications. Discussions of the ISO 14000 standards and ways of integrating the standards into construction project management are given in the next section.
INTEGRATING ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT WITH CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT
This section presents ISO 14000, the series of international standards on environmental management and the need for integrating environmental management into construction management. The ISO 14000 standards address the aspects of environmental management (Kloepfer 1997; Peglau 1999; Quality Network 1999) shown in Table 4.
As a subset of ISO 14000, the EMS is a systematic approach to dealing with issues related to environmental management. It is a ‘‘tool’’ that enables a company of any size or type to control the impact of its activities, products, or services on the natural environment. Although many companies in other businesses have already obtained ISO 14001 EMS certifications, none of the construction companies (contractors) in China has such a certification. In order to build the concept of environmental management into construction management, we propose that it is fundamentally important for major construction companies in China to make necessary efforts to obtain certifications on ISO 14001 EMS.
In the ISO 14001 EMS, environmental management is maintained through five stages (Fig. 2): Issuing environmental
ISO 14000 Series Standards
Environmental Management Systems: Specification with Guidance for Use
Guidelines for Environmental Auditing: General Principles of Environmental Auditing
Guidelines for Environmental Auditing: Audit Procedures —Part 1: Auditing of Environmental Management Systems
Guidelines for Environmental Auditing: Qualification Criteria for Environmental Auditors
Guidelines for Environmental Auditing: Audit Programmers, Reviews and Assessments
Environmental Labeling: Practitioner Programs—Guiding
Principles, Practices and Certification Procedures of
Life Cycle Assessment General Principles and Practices
Guide for the Inclusion of Environmental Aspects in Product Standards
implementation and operation; checking and corrective action; and management review.
ISO 14001 EMS requires construction management to establish systematic policies and methods to deal with problems related to environmental management. Specifically, the certification requires a construction company to establish objectives, targets, and programs for environmental management. A thorough analysis of all processes and methods used in construction operations is necessary in order to identify the sources and magnitude of pollution and hazards. Once the sources are identified, the construction company needs to make all necessary efforts to reduce the amount of pollution and hazards generated from a particular operation. Also, it is important to have a regular management review to ensure the suitability and sustainable implementation of the established policies and methods.
Key Stages of ISO 14000 EMS
JOURNAL OF CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT / JULY/AUGUST 2000 / 323
The establishment and implementation of ISO 14001 EMS requires total commitment and cooperation of all parties involved in the supply chain, including construction contractors, supervisors, designers, manufacturers, and investors (Cysewski 1995). However, in developing countries such as China, there are many difficulties and challenges ahead for implementing ISO 14001 EMS in the construction industry. The most formidable one is that efforts spent in environmental protection do not necessarily result in lower project cost and/or shorter durations. In fact, introducing environmental management into construction management increases the project direct costs because, at present, contractors do not need to pay for the pollution and hazards generated by their projects, if they can get away without obeying current environment and construction laws. Another difficulty is that the awareness of environmental protection among the general public is low compared to that in many developed countries. People seem to be too busy accumulating personal wealth to worry about the natural environment. As a consequence, the public pressure on the construction industry for improving its environmental management is not very high.
With these difficulties and challenges in mind, we believe that it is important for the government to further reinforce relevant environmental protection laws on one hand, and promote the general education in the importance of protecting the natural environment on the other.
CONCLUSIONS
In order to tackle pollution and hazards generated by urban construction projects in China, we first presented a qualitative system to identify and categorize sources of pollution and hazards on construction sites. Methods for preventing or reducing the amount of pollution and hazards at the sources are provided. Then, a method is presented to quantitatively measure the construction pollution index (CPI), which indicates the accumulated pollution and hazards generated from a construction site. Integrated with MS Project, a popular scheduling software used by construction professionals in China, we developed a computer tool which can automatically generate the pollution and hazards distribution diagram over the project duration. The distribution diagram can assist project managers to identify the worst periods in terms of emission of pollution and to take necessary preventive measures to reduce the amount of pollution and hazards. The computer tool is being tested on different projects, and detailed descriptions of the computer tool and its test results will be reported in the future.
As the concept of environmental management is relatively new in China, we recommend that it is vital for major construction companies in China to obtain ISO 14001 EMS certifications. By doing so, construction companies will establish comprehensive policies and regulations and safe-guard the implementation of environmental management within the context of construction management.
Cysewski, J. B. (1995). ‘‘3M International Environmental Management System.’’ Total Quality and Envir. Mgmt., 5(2), 25–34.
Kloepfer, R. J. (1997). ‘‘Will the real ISO 14001 please stand up? ’’ Civ. Engrg., ASCE, 67(11), 45–47.
ISO. (1999). The ISO Survey of ISO 9000 and ISO 14000 Certificates: Seventh cycle—1997, ^ Li, Z. (1998). Statutebook of Japanese laws in construction industry, China Aerial Industry Press, Beijing.
McMullan, R. (1993). Environmental science in building, 3rd Ed., Macmillan, London.
Peglau, R. (1999). The number of ISO 14001/EMAS registration of the world, ISO World Press, New York, ^ isoworld/english/analy14k.htm&.
Quality Network. (1999). International Standard ISO 14000, ^
1 Res. Student, Dept. of Build. and Real Estate, Hong Kong Polytechnic Univ., Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong.
Prof., Dept. of Build. and Real Estate, Hong Kong Polytechnic Univ., Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong.
Note. Discussion open until January 1, 2001. To extend the closing date one month, a written request must be filed with the ASCE Manager of Journals. The manuscript for this paper was submitted for review and possible publication on March 2, 1999. This paper is part of the Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, Vol. 126, No. 4, July/ August, 2000. qASCE, ISSN 0733-9634/00/0004-0320–0324/$8.00 1 $.50 per page. Paper No. 20401.
320 / JOURNAL OF CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT / JULY/AUGUST 2000
320 / JOURNAL OF CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT / JULY/AUGUST 2000
