See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at:
Demystifying stakeholders' commitment and its impacts on construction projects
Article  in  Construction Management and Economics · September 2004
10.1080/0144619042000300736 · Source:
CITATIONS	READS
4 authors, including:
City University of Hong Kong	City University of Hong Kong
117 PUBLICATIONS   3,193 CITATIONS   	48 PUBLICATIONS   997 CITATIONS
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
Family Caregiving View project
All content following this page was uploaded by Mei-Yung Leung on 16 January 2019.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
Demystifying stakeholders' commitment and its impacts on construction projects
To cite this article: Mei-Yung Leung , Alice Chong , S. Thomas Ng & Michael C. K. Cheung (2004)
Demystifying stakeholders' commitment and its impacts on construction projects, Construction
To link to this article:
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
Construction Management and Economics (September 2004) 22, 701–715
Demystifying stakeholders’ commitment and its impacts on construction projects
MEI-YUNG LEUNG1*, ALICE CHONG2, S. THOMAS NG3 and
MICHAEL C. K. CHEUNG1
1Department of Building and Construction, City University of Hong Kong, Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong
2Department of Applied Social Studies, City University of Hong Kong, Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong
3Department of Civil Engineering, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong
Received 8 January, 2003, accepted 14 August 2003
Construction projects are typified by the involvement of a number of participants. Each project team member has his/own expertise, and would contribute towards the success of the project. However, since their inputs are often interdependent, conflicts may arise in some circumstances. This is particularly evidenced when they are working within limited resources in terms of time and budget. One cannot expect a project team to attain the necessary synergy when common goals are not being visualized or observed. To improve the implementation performance of construction projects, it is necessary to investigate the goal commitment amongst temporary project team members. This research study aims to investigate the impacts of commitment amongst major project stakeholders. The results indicate that high affective commitment induces high performance and satisfaction, while the continuous commitment provokes intention to quit.
Commitment, performance, satisfaction, intention to quit, turnover
Introduction
Construction is a team work that depends largely on the commitment of every stakeholder to excel. Despite that, not all project participants would have agreed goals in time, cost and quality, and conflicts between stakeholders may arise in some circumstances. The diversity in goals is magnified in times of economic adversity and uncertainty, as one would place a higher priority to self-interest than project success (Walker, 1996; Leung et al., 2002). The situation is aggravated when participants with ‘no volition after the discussion and no action after the decision’ exist throughout the decision making process, as they would only contribute negatively to the synergy of the whole construction team.1
As project participants are a volitional element in a construction project, the existence of desirable and reachable goals does not necessarily guarantee sufficient compelling
*Author for correspondence. bcmei@cityu.edu.hk
force to drive an individual to act. Liu (1999) advocated that commitment amongst construction professionals in maintaining the specific goals during the implementation process is essential. While establishing the readiness to commit is an intricate task, evaluating the consequences resulted from a lack of goal commitment amongst professionals is even more tortuous.
Construction Management and Economics
ISSN 0144-6193 print/ISSN 1466-433X online © 2004 Taylor & Francis Ltd
Over the years, many management scientists have applied behavioural theories to examine the complicated construction management issues. For instance, Liu and Walker (1998) applied the expectancy theory to investigate project outcomes; Lingard and Rowlinson (1998) used the goal-setting theory to examine behaviour-based safety management problems; Green (1999) studied the participative research strategy for soft value management; Walker and Newcombe (2000) investigated the use of power on construction projects; Leung et al. (2002) studied the goal specificity and conflict management in construction; while Rowlinson (2001) examined the importance of commitment in governmental departments especially in light of dynamic environment and changed organizational structures. There is a strong possibility that behavioural theories can be used for analysing the goal commitment amongst construction participants. The aim of this paper is to examine the impacts of commitment in construction projects based on the behavioural paradigm.
Forms of commitment

An attitude towards the organization that links the person to the organization
Affective attachment to the goals and values of an organization
The relative strength of an individual’s identification with and involvement in a particular organization
Job/project commitment
One’s attitude toward one’s profession or vocation
The likelihood that an individual will stick with a job and feel psychologically attached to it, whether it is satisfying or not
A function of personal, role-related, and structural characteristics as well as situational factors related to the job setting
Determination to try for a goal even through difficulties
A function of the expectancy and valence associated with the goal
(a) Pre-choice evaluations of potential goals
(b) Subsequent choice of a personal goal
(c) Maintenance of that choice
Sheldon (1971)
Rusbult and Farrell (1983)
Randall and Cote (1991)
Locke and Latham (1990)
Commitment can be related to different behavioural and psychological aspects, such as organization (O’Reilly and Chatman, 1986), union (Gordon et al., 1980), job (Rusbult and Farrell, 1983), career (Blau, 1985), team (Bishop and Scott, 2000) and personal goals (Hollenbeck et al., 1989; Locke and Latham, 1990) (refer to Table 1). Researchers believe that commitment can be broadly classified into organizational commitment (company and union), project/task commitment (job and career), as well as personal goal commitment. Balfour and Wechsher (1996) found that both organizational and personal characteristics could affect the degree of organizational commitment, while organizational commitment might in turn influences the multiple dimensions of organizational effectiveness (e.g. adaptability, turnover and tardiness rate) (Angle and Perry, 1981). In behavioural science perspective, organizational commitment is influenced by the relative strength of individuals’ involvement in the specific organization. According to Mowday et al. (1979) and Tubbs (1993), those who are strongly committed to the organization can be characterized by at least three interrelated factors: (a) a strong belief in and an acceptance of the organization’s goals and values; (b) a willingness to exert considerable effort on behalf of the organization; and (c) a strong desire to maintain membership in the organization. Table 1 Essences of definitions of commitment
As highlighted in Table 1, neither organizational commitment nor project/task commitment has little to do with personal dimension. Commitment implies a personal determination to try for a goal or to keep trying for a goal irrespective of whether the goal (organization/project/ person) is specified or not.2 In order to maintain goals during the implementation process, goal commitment amongst construction professionals is crucial to the success of a construction project (Liu, 1999). According to Mowday et al. (1979, 1982), goal commitment can be expressed through two phenomena namely the attitudinal commitment (identification of the person with the project) and behavioural commitment (binding of his/her actions). Behavioural commitment needs time and effort to pursuit the goals (e.g. the client’s requirements in the preliminary stage) and implement the final products (e.g. drawings/documents), while attitudinal commitment refers to affective (want to), continuance (need to) and normative (ought to) commitment in psychological states (Allen and Meyer, 1990, 1996). The concepts of these three attitudinal commitments should therefore be applied in the study to understand the stakeholders’ commitment on construction projects.
Affective commitment (AC) refers to professionals’ emotional attachment to, identification with and involvement in the construction projects (See Allen and Meyer, 1990), which is similar to the three organizational commitment characteristics of Mowday et al. (1979) discussed above. AC is an attitudinal commitment that derives from a combination of project perceptions and personal characteristics, which becomes positive feelings about a construction project and in turns lead to commitment (Mowday et al., 1982).
Continuance commitment (CC) refers to the costs when employees leave the organization or the undertaking project (Allen and Meyer, 1990). Its underlying construct can be viewed as a tendency to engage in consistent lines of activity based on the individual’s recognition of the costs (cf: Becker, 1996). However, the unwillingness to leave the company may be due to attractive cost inducement but not the AC (Meyer and Allen, 1984). As a result, a high level of CC would not necessarily associate with an intention to stay in the organization/project. According to Brown (1996), CC is a behavioural approach whereby a person attains a state or position of commitment as a result of engaging in committing behaviours, and CC is an additive function of rewards, investments and alternatives (Oliver, 1990).
Normative commitment (NC) refers to employee’s feelings of obliging to remain in the project (refer Allen and Meyer, 1990). The underlying construct of NC is that commitment is the totality of internalized normative pressures to act in a way which meets project goals and interests (cf: Wiener, 1982). Allen and Meyer (1990) found that there was significant relationship between AC and NC, as the feelings of obliging to maintain membership in the organization may be meaningfully linked to the feelings of desire although they are not identical. However, there has been little investigation on the AC/CC/NC the project level in the construction industry.
Commitment is an important attitudinal predictor of employee behaviour and intentions (Becker et al., 1996; Mowday et al., 1982). It can affect the project performance, the job satisfaction, the intention to quit and the actual turnover in the company. The consequences of commitment include two main routes: (a) commitment → performance → satisfaction (Hackett et al., 1994; Cranny et al., 1992); and (b) commitment → intention to quit → turnover (Steel and Ovalle, 1984). Commitment → performance → satisfaction → commitment cycle
Commitment enhances feelings of security, efficacy, loyalty and duty (Meyer et al., 1993); encourages creativity; maintains an identity distinct from the organization (O’Reilly and Chatman, 1986); reduces the absenteeism
(Sagie, 1998); increases employee tenure (Beck and Wilson, 2000); improves job performance (e.g. Hollenbeck et al., 1989) and gains job satisfaction (e.g. Sagie, 1998). Table 2 highlights the results of previous studies on the relationships amongst commitment, performance and satisfaction.
Table 2	Summary of the previous findings of commitment → performance → satisfaction
Findings of performance
Researcher(s)
Commitment — (+ve) — performance
Commitment — (no relation) — performance.
AC — (+ve) — performance
CC — (-ve) — performance
Commitment leads to satisfaction
Performance — (+ve) — job satisfaction
Job satisfaction was a determinant of commitment
Performance — ( weak ) — job satisfaction
Shore and Martin (1989)
AC – Affective Commitment; CC – Continuous Commitment
Although positive relationship between AC and job performance and negative relationship between CC and performance were found in the various previous studies, some still obtained no relationship between commitment (or CC) and job performance (e.g. Steers, 1977; Somers and Birnbaum, 1998). Since AC and NC share similar characteristics, both AC and NC are hypothesized in the paper as imparting positive effects on the construction performance, while CC is regarded as a negative determinant. Construction professionals’ emotional attachment, actual involvement and internalized normative pressures can improve the project performances (e.g. high quality of works, good use of time and resources, etc.)
and participant’s satisfaction (e.g. promotion, good relationship, appropriate working hours, within budget, etc.), while the commitment supported by the cost inducement causes negative final outcome for the team members on the construction project.
According to Cranny et al. (1992), job satisfaction is an affective reaction to the job that results from the incumbent’s comparisons between the actual and desired outcomes, and it is a more unstable and changeable attitude than commitment (Mowday et al., 1979). Henne and Locke (1985) concluded that high satisfaction is a result, not a cause, of high performance. The relationship between the performance and the satisfaction is higher than the relationship between the commitment with the performance (Shore and Martin, 1989). In the feedback loop, satisfaction keeps people attached to the organization, improves commitment to the organization, and creates the willingness to accept new challenges (Sagie, 1998). Hence, it is often considered as a predictor of commitment rather than the contrary. High level of job satisfaction induces high level of commitment on the subsequent tasks.
However, insufficient commitment to a specific project goal may also induce negative effects upon the individual and/or the organization (Randall et al., 1990), including a stifling of individual creativity/innovation, a disloyalty to the firm and greater turnover. Commitment can still be maintained amongst the stakeholders by the attractive cost (e.g. increasing salary, high tender fee /contract sum). Table 3 shows the relationship amongst commitment, intention to quit and turnover. Table 3 shows that the commitment in the form of CC has no relationship to the intention to quit (Meyer and Allen, 1984), but the commitment generally has negative correlation to both intention to quit and turnover. Intention to quit mediates the relationship between commitment and turnover (Jaros et al., 1993). While intention to quit is a direct predictor of actual turnover (Stroh et al., 1996), noncommitment and dissatisfaction provoke intention to quit and turnover indirectly (Michaels and Spector, 1982).
In sum, project success depends on a high level of job performance (Hackett et al., 1994) and job satisfaction (Cranny et al., 1992), and a low level of turnover behavior (Steel and Ovalle, 1984). AC and NC may improve both the job performance and satisfaction and reduce the turnover rate of construction professionals; while CC could increase the intention to quit and turnover.
Research method
The three forms of commitment (i.e. AC, CC and NC) were measured using the subscale for each facet proposed by Allen and Meyer (1990). Meyer and Allen (1997) reported strong reliability coefficients of 0.85 for scores obtained using the affective scale, 0.79 using the continuance scale and 0.73 using the normative scale. Revised scale was formed in the study by using four items for each facet for construction projects. In addition, two modified questions from the Organizational Commitment Questionnaire (OCQ) (Mowday et al., 1979) were also incorporated into the affective subscale for measuring and cross-checking the affective facet of personal commitment on construction projects. The questions used in the questionnaire are listed in Appendix A.
Table 3	Summary of the previous findings of commitment → intention to quit → turnover
Findings of turnover
Researcher(s)
Intention to quit — (best predictor of) — turnover
Commitment and Satisfaction — (lead to) — intention to quit — (lead to) — turnover
Satisfaction — (moderate relation) — intention to quit
Satisfaction — (-ve) — turnover
Satisfaction — (no relation) — turnover
Shore and Martin (1989)
Michaels and Spector (1982)
Carsten and Spector (1987)
CC – Continuous Commitment
In order to better explain the impact of commitment, three important behavioural aspects namely performance, satisfaction and turnover were derived. For job performance items, emphasis is placed on the time, cost and quality of project, which is coherent with the standards of work, good use of time and resources as proposed by Shore and Martin (1989). As job satisfaction was defined
as ‘a pleasurable or positive emotional state resulting from the appraisal of one’s job or job experiences’ (Locke, 1976, p. 1300), questions relating to individual’s satisfaction on various aspects in the job such as the ‘increment of salary’ and ‘nature of works’ were set. The questions pertaining to turnover were designed to measure the ‘intention to quit the project’, ‘intention to quit the company’ and ‘has the respondent already quitted the company.’ (Michaels and Spector, 1982). A seven-point scale was provided for the commitment and the consequence variables identified.
The survey was conducted in Hong Kong, and was administered by fax or by post. A sample of 110 was randomly selected, and 64 sets of questionnaire were returned representing a response rate of 58%. All returned questionnaires were completed by project team members including quantity surveyors (33%), architects (23%), structural engineers (20%), building surveyors (16%) and project managers (8%). Majority of respondents were working in private consultant practices (48%) or public sector (38%), and most of them with 5–10 years of relevant experience (41%).
The relationships amongst commitment and the consequential variables were analysed through correlation coefficient, multiple regression and structural equation model. Table 4 presents the intercorrelations of the criticality indices of commitment and the outcome variables to construction works. As shown in Table 4, there are positive significant relationship between AC and satisfaction (0.538, p < 0.01), AC and job performance (0.495, p < 0.01), satisfaction and performance (0.480, p < 0.01), CC and intention to quit project (r = 0.371, p < 0.01), AC and NC (r = 0.256, p < 0.05), intention to quit project and intention to quit company (r = 0.438, p < 0.01), and intention to quit company and turnover (r < 0.410, p < 0.01). On the other hand, there are negative significant correlations between the commitment (AC and NC)/satisfaction/performance and the intention to quit project/company/turnover variables. The results clearly reveal two main groups for the commitment in the construction projects: (1) AC, NC, job performance and satisfaction; and (2) CC, intention to quit project/ company and turnover.
In order to predict the consequences caused by commitment during the management process, regression analysis with stepwise estimation method was employed to establish an optimized multiple regression model. The model was derived when the t-values of the included (or excluded) variables were higher (or lower) than the threshold values (Howitt and Cramer, 1997). The results of regression analyses as depicted in Table 5 indicate that different consequences were regressed against different forms of commitment. Being a useful technique in exploring the predictive ability of a set of independent variables on each project success variable, the results of regression analysis in Table 5 confirm that AC is a major factor that influences the job performance and satisfaction positively. Both AC and NC affect the intention to quit project/company and turnover negatively. On the other hand, CC induces the intention to quit the project/company and, subsequently, influences the actual turnover during the implementation process.
Although regression analysis can be used for predicting final outcome, it does not provide empirical support on validation or reliability for measuring latent variables nor can it demystify the complicate relationships amongst the latent variables (Lehman, 1991; Diamantopoulos and Siguaw, 2000). For instant, job performance induces satisfaction, intention to quit company causes turnover or vice versa. Structural equation model was, therefore, applied to develop an integrated structural model to cross-check the inter-relationships amongst the hypothetical variables
Table 4	Means, standard deviations, Cronbach Alpha and correlations

Affective commitment (AC)
Continuance commitment (CC)
Normative commitment (NC)
Job satisfaction (Sat)
Job performance (JB)
Turnover (TO) Mean
**p < 0.01; The reliabilities for hypothetical variables are verified within acceptable ranges for newly created stressors (α > 0.60).
Table 5	Regression model for the prediction of commitment consequences
1 Performance (Perf)
2 Satisfaction (Sat)
3 Intention to quit the project (IQP)
4 Intention to quit the company (IQC)


AC – Affective Commitment; CC – Continuous Commit
Table 6	Fit indices of commitment models A–D


df = degree of freedom; χ2 = chi-square; RMSEA = root mean square error of approximation; GFI = Goodness of Fit Index; AGFI = Adjusted Goodness of Fit Index; RFI = Relative Fit Index; CFI = Comparative Fit Index; **p < 0.001; (^D) The causal relationships amongst the hypothetical variables in the Model D are approved by the three techniques (refer to Table 8, Figure 1 and Appendix B4).
and evaluate the effects of the three types of commitment on construction project success (Long and Kahn, 1992; Joreskog and Sorborn, 2001).3
Based on the results of correlation coefficient, three structural models were established by LISREL: Model A (a full model with two-way causal relationships amongst commitment and the consequences variables based on correlation coefficient); Model B (a modified model with one-way relationships based on regression model); and Model C (an optimized model with deletion/amendment of parts of indicates and latent variables). Table 6 presents the goodness-of-fit indexes for the three structural models.
As shown, the goodness-of-fit indexes for Model A suggest that it fits the data poorly. Model A was modified by converting the two-way path to one-way path (see Appendices B1 and B2 for Models A and B respectively). Although the x2 and the RMSR have improved in Model B, they are still higher than Model C. Parts of the predictive ability of the measures is still in significant, e.g. indicator c4 (see Appendix A) yields an error variance of 17.86 that is much higher than others; and variable p7 (see Appendix A) has negligible predictive ability to performance (λ=−0.0087). The indexes in the Table 6 show that Model C is the optimized causal model to represent the impact of commitment in construction projects due to the lower x2 (152.00) and RMSEA (0.075) and the higher GFI (0.79), AFGI (0.71), RFI (0.67) and CFI (0.88). In sum, variables c1–c3 represent AC; c5, c7 and s5 represent CC; c10–c11 represent NC, p1–p3 represent performance, and s3–s6 represent satisfaction in the measurement part of Model C (refer to Appendices A and B3). It is interesting that s5 being identified as a job satisfaction variable also forms part of the CC variables with negative effect in the measurement part of Model C. One can conclude that CC in construction perspective should involve the cost of leaving and the relationship with colleagues in the organization.
For the structural equation part, the two variables namely intention to quit the project and turnover are removed from the model, as the results in Model B indicate that intention to quit the project has an insignificant correlation with turnover. The overall fit indexes have increased after removing these two variables. In order to improve the fit of model, further re-specifications were made by (a) removing the path from AC to intention to quit the company, (b) reversing the causal relation between performance and satisfaction, and (c) adding a causal path from performance to intent to quit company in Model B.
The parameters (path coefficients) of Model C, along with their respective maximum-likelihood estimates, standard errors and t-statistics are listed in Table 7. Each estimate has the expected sign, e.g. the latent AC variable is positively related to the observed AC variables (indicators). Examinations of the t-values, which are all greater than 2.0 (cf: Diamantopoulos and Siguaw, 2000), suggesting that all parameters are significant in Model C.
Part of model
Affective commitment (AC)

Normative commitment (NC)
Performance (perf)
Satisfaction (sat)




Performance (Perf)
→ Satisfaction
Affective → performance
Satisfaction (sat)
→ Affective
→ Normative
For a comparison of the three analytical techniques, the impacts of commitment to a construction project are Table 7 Analysis of path coefficients of Model C
summarized in Table 8 and illustrated in Figure 1. It is interesting to note that only four causal relationships between the commitment and the consequence variables are supported by all three analytical techniques, while most of the other relationships are supported by either correlation/regression analysis or structural equation model only. The fit indexes of SEM for these four main lines (i.e. Model D in Table 6) is worse than the optimized model (Model C), but they are still acceptable in the test. The results revealed that CC generally has positive relationship between the intention to quit project/company and turnover, while opposite results were found in the study for AC and NC generally.
CC refers to the ‘cost’ of leaving projects. Construction participants with CC often do not attach to the project desirability intrinsically. Therefore, they only stay in the project due to the limited alternatives at the moment and are not motivated to perform the tasks well. Simultaneously, the job satisfaction does not influence the CC of project participants in the feedback process. In contrast, this
Table 8	Summary of hypotheses and findings

Hypothetical variables in causal relationships
Correlation
Regression analysis
Finding supported
AC → (+) performance
CC → (+) performance
NC → (+) performance
Perf → (+) satisfaction
Perf → (−) turnover
AC = Affective Commitment; CC = Continuous Commitment; NC = Normative Commitment;
Perf = Performance; and Sat = Satisfaction;
Yes1 – supported by correlation coefficient with p < 0.01 (see Table 4), regression analysis method (see Table 5) or structural equation model (see Table 7) ;
Yes2 – supported by correlation coefficient with p < 0.05 (see Table 4);
Yes3 – supported by all three analytical techniques;
Yes4 – supported by correlation coefficient/regression analysis, but rejected by structural equation model; Yes5 – supported by structural equation model, but rejected by correlation coefficient /regression analysis; No – rejected by all three analytical techniques.
Figure 1	Impact of commitment in construction projects
(+) – positive relationship; (-) – negative relationship; causal relationship supported by three analytical techniques; causal relationship supported by correlation and regression analysis; and causal relationship supported by structural equation mode.
study strongly suggested that participants with CC may have intention to quit the company.
Based on the literature review, there are similar characteristics between NC and AC. Although the consequences of AC and NC cannot be proved as identical in all three techniques, both AC and NC are generally affected by satisfaction positively and, simultaneously, induce the intention to quit the projects/company negatively. A project participant with either AC or NC does not want to quit the project/company due to the desirability or sense of responsibility. In contrast, his/her commitment can be enhanced by job satisfaction through the feedback process. NC emphasizes on the commitment with ‘ought to do’ and, hence, there is no emotional attachment and involvement for the project participants to implement the tasks. The results from all three analytical techniques show no relationship between NC and performance, but correlation/regression analyses indicate that NC induces turnover n egatively in the construction industry. Although NC cannot improve job performance positively, it can at least prevent the construction participants from quitting the project, thus, reducing the company turnover.
Although the negative relationship between AC and intention to quit is only supported by correlation/ regression analyses, the results of all three techniques confirm that AC is the only form of commitment to improve job performance and job satisfaction. Since project participants with AC are more attached and involved in the project, they also want to stay in the organization for the particular project. This study strongly support that AC is critical to the success of construction projects, while CC is the worst form of commitment among the three.
The results indicated that high commitment cannot be simply used as a unidimensional construct to forecast good project performance and high level of satisfaction amongst the project team members for the construction projects. Commitment is multi-dimensional and different forms of commitment would bring about various impacts upon the performance of individual team members. For instance, the owner (client) may not be satisfied with the architectural design of a simple house if the architect (one of the team members) participates in the project due to the limited amount of projects in the market (i.e. The structural drawings may not be issued according to the agreed schedule at the design stage if the project structural engineer does not have loyalty to the project (i.e. lack of AC).
The above findings carry some important practice implications on managing a construction project during the whole tendering and constructing process. First, in the pre-qualification and the tender interview of both consultants and contractors, the client (or client representative) is recommended to check the previous performance of the professionals; and to examine the professionals’ forms of commitment to the project and to the company. A track record of good project performance (in terms of time, cost and quality) and high personal satisfaction (towards salary, promotion, supervision, relationship and the nature of tasks) can encourage the project participants to apply AC in the subsequent tasks, while poor performance and low satisfaction induce the intention of stakeholders to quit the company finally. At the same time, the client should not only concern about project details in the consultant/construction tender interview process, but should also consider whether the construction professionals who attend the tender interview understand the project goals and outcome expectations, are enthusiastic about the proposed project and the nature of their involvement in the design and construction process. Action should be taken to enhance the working attitudes of the professionals and to change their commitment from the CC to the AC or NC, such as improving the relationship and communication between the client and the construction professionals, and specifying the project goals and outcome expectation. The commitment of construction team members represents the commitment of consultant firm/ construction company, which in turn determines project success or failure.
Second, a formal briefing session is suggested to be held between the design teams and the construction teams of a particular project after the tendering stage and before actual construction. Traditional construction procurement normally involves two separate teams for design (e.g. architect, engineers, surveyor, end-users, etc.) and construction (e.g. construction manager, site agent, supervisors, etc.). Construction team members implement the project mainly based on the information specified in the contract documents, but they may not fully understand the project goals and outcome expectation as perceived by the design team. For them, the project is just another task to be completed as soon as possible. It is, therefore, difficult for them to see any uniqueness in the project or to develop a sense of identification with it. A face-to-face discussion between the two teams can clarify any vague information and enhance two-way communication.
Finally, it is recommended to assign proposed or followup projects to construction professionals or contractors who have a track record of implementing the projects with the AC or NC. This will be an important source of reinforcement to the professionals, motivating them to perform with commitment.
Despite the important findings arrived at by this study, some issues are not yet handled due to sampling and methodological constraints. First, the relatively small sample size of the present study may limit the generalizability of the results. However, it should be pointed out that all respondents were identified through the membership records of various professional institutions in construction. The results also confirm that they had direct experience in the key decision making process of the construction projects. The sampling method could assure the results from being biased by any differential response to the measured variables.
Second, three statistical techniques were applied in this study to examine the relationship between the construct of commitment and job performance and satisfaction. The causal relationships partially supported by the analytical techniques are recommended for further research, in order to confirm their relationship.
Third, longitudinal case studies are recommended to cross-validate the results established in this cross-sectional study, since lateral studies can only be effective when confounding variables are constrained and controlled. It should be emphasized that the quantitative data analysis undertaken provided the context and support for subsequent qualitative studies. Further research such as case study and qualitative data analyses would be desirable to fortify our understanding on how commitment could influence construction management and in turn impact the whole project’s life cycle. Triangulation should, therefore, be employed to provide the necessary ‘leverage’ to ensure a better understanding and generalization of the causal relationship through exploratory case studies, lateral research and their interaction.
Finally, this study did not evaluate the antecedents of the commitment in construction projects, for instance, goals discrepancy between participants, peers and the organizations; senior/organizational supportiveness; project specific constraints such as project complexity, involvement period and task nature at different development/construction phases and so on. Further studies for investigating the factors affecting the forms of commitment in the construction management are recommended to improve the performance of construction professionals in the industry.
To ensure a high quality construction project to be delivered in challenging environments, a comprehensive study on construction management could provide us with valuable information for enhancing the goal commitment amongst project participants throughout the entire management process. Three forms of commitment have been identified in this paper based on literature in organizational behaviour. AC has the intrinsic characteristics of emotional attachment and involvement in the project, while CC and NC concentrate extrinsically on the ‘cost’ of leaving the project and the reason (ought) to do the project respectively. Although the consequences of commitment were studied by various researchers in the past, no absolute result has been found in the behavioural paradigm.
The study clearly supports that AC is the main criteria for construction project success (good performance and high satisfaction). Indication shows that professional responsibilities amongst the tasks (i.e. NC) depend passively upon the poor market/economic situation to maintain the construction professionals in the project/ organization (i.e. CC), which cannot enhance project performance or increase the participants’ satisfaction at the end. Managers of the construction industry need to stimulate and motivate the desirability and obligation of project participants to maintain/increase their AC or NC and to ensure the project will excel.
The work described in this paper was fully supported by a grant from CityU (Project No. 7001388).

A criticism to Hong Kong people made by the ex-Premierof the People’s Republic of China – Mr. R.J. Zhu (SCMP 9/2001).
According to Locke et al., (1981), a goal could be assigned, anticipative or set by the participant(s).
Readers are referred to Byme (1998), Diamantopoulosand Siguaw (2000) and Joreskog and Sorbom (2001) for details of the structural equation model.
