Sustainable construction aspects of using prefabrication in dense urban environment: a Hong Kong case study
To cite this article: Lara Jaillon & C. S. Poon (2008) Sustainable construction aspects of using prefabrication in dense urban environment: a Hong Kong case study, Construction Management and Economics, 26: 9, 953-966, DOI: 10.1080/01446190802259043
To link to this article:
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
Construction Management and Economics (September 2008) 26, 953–966
Sustainable construction aspects of using prefabrication in dense urban environment: a Hong Kong case study
LARA JAILLON and C. S. POON*
Department of Civil and Structural Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
Received 8 October 2007; accepted 6 June 2008
The construction industry in Hong Kong heavily relies on conventional cast in-situ construction involving extensive use of timber formworks and wet trades. In 2001, the Construction Industry Review Committee (CIRC) report described the construction activities in Hong Kong as ‘labour intensive, dangerous and polluting’, in which ‘built products are rarely defect-free’. Globally, however, the recent trend is prefabrication, which is being increasingly used in the building industry, alleviating some of the environmental burdens associated with conventional construction. The sustainable construction aspects of adopting prefabrication in high-rise buildings are examined, and the economic, environmental and social aspects of using prefabrication are assessed. A questionnaire survey was administered to experienced professionals and case studies of seven recent residential and non-residential buildings in Hong Kong were conducted. The findings revealed that environmental, economic and social benefits of using prefabrication were significant when compared to conventional construction methods. This implies that a wider use of prefabrication techniques could contribute to sustainable construction in a dense urban environment like Hong Kong.
High-rise buildings, Hong Kong, precast concrete, prefabrication, sustainable construction.
Introduction
Kibert (1994) defined sustainable construction as ‘the creation and responsible management of a healthy built environment based on resource efficient and ecological principles’. In recent years, sustainable development and sustainable construction have become a growing concern throughout the world. Construction has significant and irreversible effects on the environment such as (1) the use of land and virgin land (e.g. forests, wetlands) which often entails losses of biodiversity and soils; (2) the extensive use of natural resources, many of which are non-renewable ones; (3) the pollution of air and water reserves; (4) the consumption of water and energy; (5) waste generation; and (6) the generation of noise by construction activities (Ofori et al., 2000).
Hong Kong is a compact city and one of the most densely populated places in the world. As available land is limited and land price is expensive, the construction of
high-rise buildings is prevalent in Hong Kong. The built environment (urban environment) in Hong Kong is one of the most densely populated places despite the fact that only 20% of the whole territory is developed. The area of Hong Kong is 1104 square kilometres and the average population density was about 6420 persons per square kilometre in 2005. But in some urban districts it went up to over 50000 people per square kilometre. With such urban compactness, sustainability and sustainable construction is indeed an increasing concern in Hong Kong.
Hong Kong construction industry
The construction industry is a major industry in the Hong Kong economy, totalling about 2.9% of the GDP (in 2005), and employing about 8% of the workforce (Census and Statistics Department, 2007). In 2001, the Hong Kong construction activities were described in the Construction Industry Review Committee report as ‘labour intensive, dangerous and polluting’ (CIRC, 2001). Most of the buildings in Hong Kong are still built with labour-intensive in-situ construction methods,
*Author for correspondence. cecspoon@inet.polyu.edu.hk
in which the quality control is less efficient than in a
Construction Management and Economics
ISSN 0144-6193 print/ISSN 1466-433X online # 2008 Taylor & Francis
factory environment. The construction industry is also considered a dangerous industry, and has the highest level of accident injuries and fatalities. The accident rate per 1000 workers was about 59.9 in 2005 (Labour
Department, 2006). Comparatively, the accident rate per 1000 workers in Hong Kong is twice that of the UK and about 10 times worse than in Japan (Rowlinson, 2004).
Indeed the construction activities essentially disturb the environment, generating nuisance such as dust, noise, muddy site run-off, and considerable amount of waste. In particular, conventional construction methods involve the use of significant amounts of timber formworks and wet trades producing large quantities of waste on-site.
In Hong Kong, the management and disposal of construction waste is a major environmental issue as the availability of suitable disposal area is scarce. In 2005, about 21.5 millions tonnes of construction waste were generated, of which 11% was disposed of to landfill and 89% to public filling areas (reclamation projects). The composition of construction waste varies according to the type and scale of the building works. In recent years, construction waste in Hong Kong generally consisted of 70% of soft inert materials (soil, earth and slurry) which can be reused as fill materials in reclamation and earth filling works, 12%–15% of hard inert materials (rocks and broken concrete) which can be reused or recycled, and 15%–18% of non-inert waste (metal, timber and packaging waste) which can be recycled if not contaminated (Legislative Council, 2006). However, currently most of the non-inert waste is disposed to landfill and not recycled. Over the last decade, the generation of construction waste has more than doubled. With the current rate, the capacity of landfills and public filling areas will be exhausted by 2011–15 and by 2008 respectively (EPD, 2006). The government has recently implemented construction waste reduction measures, such as the requirement for public work contractors to set up waste management plans and comply with the trip ticket system. The trip ticket system is a recording system for trucks transporting waste, ensuring that each type of waste is directed to the appropriate facility for reuse, recycling, recovery or disposal. The recycling of hard and inert construction waste as recycled aggregates and rock fills are also being promoted. In late 2005, the government initiated a charging scheme for construction waste disposal. The charges are HK$125/tonne (or US$16/ tonne) of waste disposed to landfill, HK$100/tonne (or US$13/tonne) to sorting facilities, and HK$27/tonne (or US$3.5/tonne) to public fill reception facilities. The public fill reception facilities include facilities such as public filling areas (designated areas that accept public fill for reclamation purpose) and fill banks (areas allocated for temporary stockpile of public fill for later use).
In addition, the government also encourages the use of green building technologies and prefabrication. In 2001, the CIRC report recommended a wider use of prefabrication in buildings to alleviate some of the problems associated with in-situ construction, such as dirt, noise and construction waste generation, and lower quality control on-site. In 2001 and 2002, the Hong Kong government also introduced incentives schemes to promote the use of green and innovative building technologies and prefabrication (Buildings Department, 2001, 2002). These incentive schemes established a list of green features, including nonstructural prefabricated external walls that might be exempted from gross floor area (GFA) and site coverage (SC) calculations under the Building Ordinance.
Prefabricated building systems
Prefabrication is a manufacturing process, generally taking place at a specialized facility, in which various materials are joined to form a component part of the final installation (CIRIA, 1999). Precast construction was made feasible with the advancement of adapted equipment for transportation and erection. Worldwide, in 1996, the highest level of use of precasting was located in Denmark since the introduction of modular coordination legislation in the 1960s (MOM and MND, 1999). In Asia, Japan and Singapore achieved a precast level of 15% and 8% respectively in 1996, but Singapore aims to achieve a figure of 20% by 2010 to increase productivity and buildability (CIDB, 1992; BCA, 2005).
Recent overseas studies have acknowledged the benefits of prefabrication in buildings (Yee, 2001a, 2001b; Gibb and Isack, 2003; Pasquire et al., 2005; Blismas et al., 2006; Goodier and Gibb, 2007). Benefits of prefabrication in the literature tend to focus on cost, productivity and quality. Only a limited number of studies assess the combination of economic, environmental and social benefits of using prefabrication in buildings, especially in the case of high-rise buildings in high-density urban environments. Moreover, these studies have provided limited quantitative data. Although recent tools help in assessing the benefits of prefabrication and off-site production (Blismas et al., 2003), there seems to be a lack of understanding of the full benefits of prefabrication within the construction industry (Goodier and Gibb, 2007).
In Hong Kong, prefabricated buildings were first developed along with the public housing programme. In the mid-1980s, prefabrication combined with standard modular design, was introduced in public housing projects (Mak, 1998). Since then, the Hong Kong Housing Authority (HKHA) has encouraged the adoption of precast elements, reusable formwork and other environmentally friendly building technologies in all public housing contracts. Major precast elements used are precast facades, staircases, parapets, partition walls, semi-precast slabs and, more recently, volumetric precast bathrooms. In 2002, precast components accounted for about 17% of the concrete volume used in public housing projects (Chiang et al., 2006). In 2005, a pilot project extended the use of precasting to 65% including the use of precast kitchen and structural walls (HKHA, 2005). The majority of previous studies focused on examining innovations and performances in public housing blocks built with standard designs (Chan and Lee, 1998; Wong and Yau, 1999; Chan and Chan, 2002, 2003; Chiang et al., 2006). In contrast, the private sector in Hong Kong still predominantly adopts conventional construction methods involving the use of timber formwork, considerable amount of wet trades and bamboo scaffolding. Although the use of prefabrication techniques has increased in the privatesectorsincetheestablishmentofincentiveschemes in 2001 and 2002 (Buildings Department 2001, 2002), only a limited number of studies have examined and quantified the benefits of adopting prefabrication techniques in private developments (Fong et al., 2003). In fact, Chuand Sparrow (2001) did examine the advantages and limitations of using prefabrication in private residential buildings. However, this study was confined to qualitative data without case studies. Tam et al. (2007) have quantified, by using a case study, the reduction of wastage level on site by adopting prefabrication in buildings. However, the data gathered were somewhat limited.
This article, therefore, seeks to bridge some of the knowledge gaps in the quantification of the benefits of prefabrication in dense high-rise urban environments involving non-standard designs. The objectives of the paper are to: (1) examine the present industry practices and the views from building professionals regarding the use of prefabrication in buildings in Hong Kong; (2) study sustainable construction aspects of using prefabrication techniques in high-rise buildings located in dense urban environments; (3) assess the environmental, economic and social benefits and limitations of using prefabrication, and compare prefabrication with conventional construction methods.
Research method
The data collection process consisted of an industry questionnaire survey, and detailed case studies of recently completed residential and non-residential buildings in Hong Kong. The industry questionnaire survey aimed to investigate the perspective of the construction industry in generalregardingtheuseofprefabricationinbuildingsand the perceived advantages and limitations in dense urban environments such as Hong Kong. The case studies attempted to gather information regarding the present practicesoftheindustryandincludedon-siteobservations, projectdatacollection,face-to-faceinterviewsandspecific project-orientedquestionnairesurveys.Similarissueswere considered in the industry questionnaire survey and the case studies. The results gathered were presented using a spider chart representation (Figures1 and 2) which permitted the validation of the collected data.
For the industry survey, a questionnaire was developed from key issues identified in the literature and gathered from interviews with professionals. A pilot survey was conducted with experienced contractors, architects, engineers and prefabrication manufacturers in order to confirm the final questionnaire version. The questionnaire was then administered by email to 354 building professionals working in registered private companies and government departments. The survey was conducted over a period of five months in 2005. As presented in Table1, there were 84 respondents thus resulting in a response rate of 24%. The majority of respondents were experienced engineers (28%), architects (21%) and builders (18%) from private and government sectors. In the questionnaire, the respondents were requested to assign an appropriate rating on a scale of 1 to 5, from the highest to the lowest level, against each factor to reflect the importance of the factors in each question. For each factor, the mean was calculated based on weightings from (+1) being ‘least important’ to (+5) being ‘most important’. The questionnaire was specifically devised to allow a comparison between prefabrication and conventional construction method. A sampling distribution of the difference of means for conventional and prefabrication construction was calculated to test the significance of differences between results obtained for both construction methods (Equations1 and 2). Calculated t-value:
where x15mean for conventional construction; x25mean for prefabrication; Sx15standard deviation for conventional construction;
Sx25standard deviation for prefabrication; n15sample for conventional construction; n25sample for prefabrication.
The critical value:
Figure 1	Most important considerations when using precast and conventional construction in industry survey 2005
From the statistical table, the critical values of t-tests are 1.96 and 21.96 with 95% of confidence interval. If the calculated t-value falls within the critical values, there is no significant evidence to support that the means are different.
Face-to-face interviews were conducted with professionals in the building industry to further validate the data collected through the survey.
Detailed case studies
The case study method comprised an investigation of seven recent high-rise building projects using conventional or precast construction methods. Five residential and non-residential projects using prefabrication in Hong Kong were investigated. Two developments using conventional construction were also selected to ascertain valid comparison with the prefabricated buildings. The selection criteria for the case studies included building types and height, year of completion and project size. The seven projects are described in Tables2 and 3.
The data collection process for each project consisted of data gathered from the literature as the first step, then a project-oriented questionnaire survey and finally faceto-face interviews with the project clients, architects, contractors, engineers as well as precast element manufacturers (Table4). In addition, site observations were conducted at six construction sites and one precast manufacturing plant. Drawings and project documentation were collected from the architects, clients, contractors and the Buildings Department.
The project-oriented questionnaire was administered by email or in person, and consisted of six questions on the following topics: (1) reasons for adopting prefabrication in the project; (2) benefits; and (3) limitations of using prefabrication. The questions were similar to those used in the industry survey described above in order to allow valid comparison. Similar to the industry survey, the respondents in the project-oriented questionnaire survey were requested to assign an appropriate rating on a scale of 1 to 5, from the highest to the lowest level, against each factor. Equations1 and 2 were used to compare the results obtained from projects adopting prefabrication as opposed to those adhering to conventional construction methods. The critical values of ttests, however, varied (Tables5 and 6). The comparison between prefabrication and conventional construction were also discussed during face-to-face interviews.
Figure 2	Advantages when using precasting or conventional construction in selected projects
An estimation of material conservation for timber formworks when prefabrication techniques were adopted in the selected projects was conducted. The quantity and volume of timber formwork saved by using prefabrication was measured for each project. The dimensions of precast elements were available from the buildings’structuralplans,andtherequiredtimbervolume to build these elements was calculated by following the British Standards, the General Specifications used in Hong Kong, and the Code of Practice for Structural Use of Concrete (Buildings Department, 2004). According to the General Specifications, the timber formworks can be reused for a maximum of nine times. The timber formwork system used for the calculation was standard

Quantity surveyor

sanded Douglas fir exterior plywood, 7-ply 19mm thick (BS 5975: 1996) (BSI, 1996, p. 83). The dimensioning and spacing of the primary and secondary members to stiffen the plywood were calculated from the BS 5975: 1996) (BSI, 1996, pp.88–91), for slabs, beams, columns and facades/walls. The cutting wastage was also taken into account for each type of element. The cutting wastage for slabs and beams was estimated at 5% for plywood and 7% for softwood sawn-timber stiffener. The cutting wastage for walls and columns was estimated at 5% for plywood, and 10% for softwood sawn-timber stiffener (Poon and Yip, 2005). Potential material and cost savings by using prefabrication in lieu of timber formwork were also discussed and estimated for each case study (Table7).
Other aspects of the building performance for the selected prefabricated buildings were investigated. These comprised the construction cost and time, the labour requirementon-siteandtheaccidentrateper1000workers. For each project, the data were gathered through face-toface interviews with the project manager, the architect and/or the contractor (Table8). Sustainable construction aspects of prefabrication are discussed below with regard to economic, environmental and social aspects.
Table 2	Details of residential building projects using conventional construction and prefabrication
Conventional construction	Precast construction
Year of construction
Tower construction
Precast % (by volume) Type of prefabricated elements

Eight 35-storey towers providing 1404 units

Two 48-storey towers &
Prefabrication & aluminium/steel system formworks
-Precast staircase & fac¸ade
4 days/floor 20 months
One 32-storey tower & 2-level podium, providing 310 units
Prefabrication & steel system formwork
-Precast staircase & staircell
-Precast facade & bay window
-Precast structural wall
-Precast bathroom & kitchen
In the industry and the project-oriented surveys, the results consistently revealed that improved quality control
Table 3	Details of non-residential building projects using conventional construction and prefabrication
and construction waste reduction were the two most importantbenefitswhenadoptingprefabricationinbuildings. As seen by the actors, other major benefits mentioned included improved health and safety, better onsite environmental conditions (less dust and lower noise), as well as a reduction in labour demand, construction time
Precast construction
Project 5 Institutional
Project 6 Office
One 14-storey tower
One 17-storey tower
One 36-storey tower
One 33-storey tower
Year of construction
Conventional construction
Tower construction
Conventional construction
Precasting & steel large panel formwork
Precast % (by volume)
Type of prefabricated elements
-Precast beams
-Precast staircase
-Precast staircase
-Precast staircase
-Dry wall panels







and material use (Table5). Most of these factors contribute toenvironmental,economic and social benefits.
As shown in Table5, some benefits such as waste reduction and improved quality control were perceived as greater benefits in the project-oriented survey rather than in the industry survey (t-values(22.00), indicating that prefabrication benefits might actually be greater in practice than generally expected by the building industry in Hong Kong. Similarly, the respondents’ overall satisfaction level when using prefabrication was greater in practice when compared to the perceptions found in the industry survey (t-value522.37(22.00).
In the case study, the interviewees felt that additional inducements for adopting prefabrication methods in the selected projects were the incentive schemes provided by the government and the improved marketing image in demonstrating the use of environmentally friendly construction methods.
Economic benefits of using prefabrication
The results indicate that respondents’ opinions are extremely divided on the cost of using prefabrication when compared to conventional construction. The disparity in the results shows that economic benefits are difficult to evaluate with off-site production (Blismas et al., 2006; Goodier and Gibb, 2007). While the majority of respondents in the industry survey believe that the construction cost with prefabrication is about 20% more expensive than conventional construction, in the case studies, based on the limited data gathered, it was found that the average construction cost for prefabrication was only slightly higher (0.25% to 3%) than conventional construction. Previous research (Mak, 1998) showed that the cost of precasting is higher than in-situ construction by 10%–20%. However, some interviewees stated that reductions and savings in various other categories generally offset the slightly higher cost.
A recentstudy by Goodier and Gibb(2007) shows that the major advantages of offsite construction are the reduction of on-site construction time, the improved quality and the reduction of defects. With the exception of Project 5, the data indicated that construction time is significantly reduced by about 20% in projects adopting prefabrication and thus resulting in considerable savings (Table8). Prefabrication contributes to less work completed on-site (e.g. external wall finishes, laying tiles and plastering) saving time at the later stage of the project, and avoids onsite construction delay due to local weather conditions. Prefabrication also permits early building enclosure and commencement of indoor works. Chu and Sparrow (2001) asserted that construction time reduction is also reflected in lower site overheads, less interest on loan repayments and early rental returns when prefabrication is used.
By adopting prefabrication, builders enjoy a shorter construction duration and lower labour requirement on site, both contributing to considerable savings in labour cost. In the case studies, the labour requirement is reduced on average by 16% and up to 30% in some projects. As precast components are produced off-site at a precast factory, fewer carpenters, steel reinforcement workers and plasterers are required on-site. Also, in Hong Kong, the precast factories are located in the Guangdong Province of China where both material and labour costs are lower (Chu and Wong, 2005).
Another economic benefit of using prefabrication found in the case studies is the improved quality and more rigorous quality control. While on-site output quality is highly dependent on the workmanship of construction workers and their supervision, in the case of prefabrication, quality is easier to control in a factory environment. Precast components are checked at the factory, which leads to not only significant reduction in defects on-site but also an improvement in the durability of components, thus resulting in considerable savings. Maintenance work and associated costs might also be reducedduetoimprovedqualityanddurability(e.g.fewer instances of de-bonding tiles and water leakage risks).
Finally, the interviewees reported that gross floor area (GFA) exemption provided by government incentives schemes (Buildings Department, 2001, 2002) for the adoption of green features permitted the developers to gain one additional floor in most developments. In Project 2, GFA exemption accounted for about 10% of the total GFA. The economic benefits of these green features, therefore, are considerable.
Environmental benefits of using prefabrication
In the study, a variety of environmental benefits, namely material conservation and reduction in waste, air pollution as well as water consumption, were found. The use of prefabrication techniques contributes to both material conservation and waste reduction. The respondents believe that waste reduction is the principal advantage of using precasting. The case studies show significant wastage reduction levels on construction sites
Table 5	Sampling distribution of the difference of means between industry survey and case study project-oriented survey
Factors	Industry survey	Case study	x1{x2 sx1{x2	t	tCritical
project-oriented survey
-Reduction of construction waste
-Improved on-site environmental issues:
construction dust reduction -Improved health and safety -Improved site management/
-Reduction of construction time
-Reduction of material use
-Reduction of labour demand
-Improved productivity
-Reduction of programme time
-Improved ease of construction
-Lack of onsite storage area
-Higher initial cost
-Higher general cost
-Resistance to change
-Transportation
-Lack of in-house expertise
-Lack of industry expertise
-Reduction of construction waste
-Delivery to site
-Reliability of product -Monitoring/production techniques -Design
-Reduction in construction time
-Communication with other members of the construction team
-Reduce waste
-Quality of end product
-Quality of design
-Aesthetic quality
-Ease of maintenance
-Reduce overall project cost
-Reduction of construction waste
construction dust reduction -Improved health and safety
-Reduction of construction time
-Reduction of material use
-Reduction of labour demand
-Improved productivity
-Reduction of programme time -Improved ease of construction
-Lack of onsite storage area
-Higher initial cost
-Resistance to change
-Transportation
-Lack of in-house expertise
-Lack of suppliers
-Lack of industry expertise
when compared with conventional construction, with an average reduction of 65% and up to 70% in some projects. With prefabrication, timber formworks are avoided, saving precious space at the landfills. In addition, most of the trades generating waste on-site are conducted off-site at the manufacturing plant, where it is easier to reuse and recycle the waste generated. Reusable and recyclable steel formworks are used to cast the precast elements that also help avoid waste generation.
In the case studies, material conservation achieved by reducing timber formworks, plastering, tiling and concrete works is significant. As shown in Table7, the quantity of saved timber was about 6.16kg/m2 of construction floor area (CFA) on average. The figures considerably vary from project to project. This is due to the difference in prefabrication percentages, the types of precasting (e.g. structural and volumetric precast components), the repetition levels and the number of floors/ blocks. According to a recent study, timber formwork accounts for about 30% wastes identified in conventional construction sites, while wet trades and finishing works account for about 20% (Poon et al., 2004). In the case studies, it is found that a reduction of plastering works (100%), tiling and concrete works (50%) are significant and contribute to waste reduction (Ng, 2002). Tam et al. (2005) have estimated that prefabrication in buildings contribute to waste reduction in plastering, timber formwork and concrete works by about 100%, 74%–87% and 51%–60% respectively. In the case studies it became clear thatplasteringworksareavoidedduetothehighqualityof concrete finish achieved with steel formworks. In addition, the tiling works are conducted in a factory environment resulting in less wastage, improved quality and durability, as well as reduced maintenance work and associated wastage during the operation phase. Quality control at the factory also permits easy identification of defectsandrejectionofunsuitableprecastelementsbefore theyaretransportedtothesite,resultinginlesswastageon site arising from defects and rebuilt works.
In this study, air pollution reduction is examined onsite at the construction site, and off-site during the manufacturing process. According to the participants in the case studies, dust on-site is significantly reduced when adopting prefabrication. Prefabrication contributes to reductions of onsite construction activities and construction duration, thus reducing the nuisance factor faced by the nearby residents. The benefits are enhanced in dense urban environments such as Hong Kong, where sites are generally congested and surrounded by high-rise buildings. Moreover, pollution that occurs off-site during the manufacturing process is easier to control in a factory environment.
In the study, it was apparent that prefabrication contributes to a reduction in water consumption on-site, as elements are manufactured in a factory environment
Table 7	Material and cost savings of timber formwork by using prefabrication in selected projects
Timber formwork
Quantity of timber saved (t)






a Timber price in Hong Kong: b disposal charge at landfills: US$15HK$7.8.
and wet trades (including tiling works) are avoided on-site. As mentioned above, plastering work is avoided due to the high quality concrete finish obtained with steel formworks. Project 2 achieved a 41% reduction of water consumption, due to prefabrication, dry construction system (hardiwall partition system), and recycling water treatment facility on-site.
Social benefits of using prefabrication
Improved site safety is found to be a major benefit of prefabrication when compared to conventional construction. Prefabrication contributes to a cleaner and safer working environment on-site, and safety control at the manufacturing plant is more efficient. Risks associated with working at height are avoided in the factory environment, thus improving workers’ safety. Compared to the industry figures, the case studies show a significant reduction of accident rates (63% lower), with an average of 22 accidents per 1000 workers. Prefabrication also contributes to a reduction in construction noise and dust on-site, thus benefiting both the employees and the neighbouring communities. In addition, prefabrication improved quality and durability, tackling the maintenance problem of debonding tilesandeventuallyseemstoensurepublicsafety.
Table 8	Building performance for prefabricated building systems in the selected case studiesa
Construction cost
Construction time
Construction waste
+less than 2%
a Data are gathered through interviews with project managers, architects and contractors in each project; b Comparison with industry figure in 2005 of 59.9 accident rate per 1000 workers.
Although the findings suggest that precast construction could bring significant benefits to the Hong Kong construction industry, the participants also expressed concerns about its application in dense urban environments. The industry survey respondents felt that higher initial cost and site dimensions (narrow site) were two major limitations of using prefabrication, followed by a
natural resistance to change and higher general cost (Table5). The respondents also thought that project costs were higher in prefabrication than conventional construction (t-value53.13>2.00). The results from both surveys show consistency. In the project-oriented survey results, other limitations included the lack of flexibility and onsite storage areas, and site access (Table5).
Economic limitations of using prefabrication
Although the findings suggest that prefabrication techniques provide significant economic advantages compared with conventional construction, participants in the study reported some economic limitations. As shown in Table6, the higher initial cost is a major economic limitation in adopting prefabrication when compared with conventional construction methods (t-value523.17 (22.262). The higher initial cost is mainly due to the preliminary investment in a set of fabrication moulds (steel moulds). Chu and Sparrow (2001) also argued that precast construction could lead to higher cranage requirement resulting in higher costs. In the case studies, the respondents also mentioned that the transportation cost of prefabricated elements was higher when compared to conventional construction. For the case of Hong Kong, most prefabrication factories are located in the Guangdong Province of the People’s Republic of China, which increases the overall transportation distance. A recent study (Goodier and Gibb, 2007) showed that life cycle costs should be used for the purposes of comparison. Many professionals in the current study, however, believed that by adopting a life cycle costing approach, the higher cost of prefabrication could be offset by other factors, such as reduction in construction time, labour requirement on site, and waste and resources reductions. One respondent also believed that by adopting more standardized component sizes across projects, the initial cost in steel mould fabrication could be reduced.
Environmental limitations of using prefabrication
Some respondents felt that the transportation of prefabricated elements and its associated pollution are environmental limitations when compared with conventional construction. One contractor mentioned that energy consumption is increased by 12% due to the transportation of the precast components. However, one respondent believed that within a life cycle approach, the air pollution on-site is significantly reduced as major building works are carried out off-site. In addition, air pollution is easier to control in a factory environment.
Social limitations of using prefabrication
One respondent argued that a wider use of prefabrication could pose serious social problems in Hong Kong. The reductionoflabourrequirementon-siteasaresultofusing prefabrication techniques might increase the unemployment rate in the buildingindustry, and affect the economy ofHongKong,asmostprefabricationfactoriesarelocated in the Guangdong Province. A recent study (Tam, 2002) demonstrated that a wider use of prefabrication could cause a 43% reduction in site labour requirement.
Other aspects
The results show that small site dimensions (narrow sites), the lack of on-site storage area, site access and transportation are critical when using prefabrication in dense urban environments. With the adoption of the justin-time delivery principle, storage area on-site can be kept to a minimum (Chu and Wong, 2005). In Project 5, the storage area for prefabricated elements accounted for about 50% of the typical floor area. In the case studies, site access for large precast elements seemed to be an issue due to traffic congestion and narrow access roads.
Other limitations with the use of prefabrication reported by the interviewees are the need for early decisions in the design and building process, and the resistance to change typical in any industry. Early collaboration between the designers and the contractor is required, as elements are fabricated off-site before construction starts. This also implies a lack of flexibility in allowing late design changes to meet market needs.
Comparison between prefabrication and conventional construction
One of the objectives of this study was to compare the use of precast and conventional construction methods in buildings in Hong Kong. In both surveys, the results show consistency. The respondents were requested to assign an appropriate rating on a scale of 1 to 5, from the highest to the lowest level, against each factor to reflect the importance of the factors. As presented in Figures1 and 2 and Table6, the respondents believe that waste reduction and end product quality were the most important considerations when using prefabrication whereas these considerations were the least important in conventional construction as indicated by the industry survey. The respondents reported that maximization of returns was the most important consideration in conventional construction, followed by reduction of overall project cost and design quality. In the industry survey (Table6), the results demonstrate that there are significant differences between the mean values for prefabrication and conventional construction for all factors with the exception of ‘reduce overall project cost’ (t-value521.43>21.96). Also, in the project-oriented survey, ‘project cost savings’ was considered as a greater advantage when using conventional construction compared to the use of prefabrication techniques (t-value53.52>2.262). For most factors, the mean values for the prefabrication method are higher than those of the conventional method (t-values(21.96 and 22.262), showing improvement. The waste reduction factor demonstrates the highest significance when calculating differences between means (t5213.41), and is considered the greatest benefit of using prefabrication.
Building performances and material savings in the selected projects adopting prefabrication
In the case studies, the building performance data were gathered through interviews with the project manager,the architect and the contractor in each project. As shown in Table8, the prefabrication percentages (by volume) for the five case studies were on average about 57%. The construction cost for prefabrication was slightly higher than for conventional construction method (on average 1.4% higher). The average construction time and labour requirement reduction achieved on-site were about 15% and 16%, respectively. The average accident rate was low, about 22.3 per 1000 workers. Construction waste generation on site was also reduced by about 65% on average. As presented in Table7, the amount of timber saved by avoiding the use of timber formworks in the five developments was considerable, with an average of 6.16kg/m2 of CFA. This contributed to significant savings in material and waste disposal costs.

The study aimed to assess the sustainable construction aspects of prefabricated high-rise buildings in the dense urban environment of Hong Kong. The study shows that the improved quality control, improved environmental performance (reduction of waste, dust and noise), improved site safety, the reduction of labour demand and construction time are significant benefits when adopting prefabrication. In the case studies, on average, a reduction of 65% of construction waste, 16% of labour requirement on-site and 15% of construction time was noted when adopting prefabrication. The accident rate was on average 63% lower than the industry figure. The findings also revealed that the construction cost was slightly higher than conventional construction when adopting precasting (+1.4% on average). However, this was offset by a reduction of site activities and construction time (less on-site finish work with prefabrication), as well as improved quality and environmental performances. As far as limitations are concerned, the major limitations of using prefabrication in a dense urban environment included the higher initial cost, site dimensions (narrow site), site access, and the lack of storage area on-site for prefabricated elements. However, these limitations could be overcome.
In conclusion, this study, through a variety of data, has showed that a wider application of prefabrication in buildings in Hong Kong could significantly contribute to economic, environmental and social benefits, especially in dense urban environments. The aspiration towards a more environmentally responsible and sustainable building industry is critical to achieve a healthy built environment and efficient use of resources. Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. Thanks are due to the professionals of the building industry for their generous contributions and participation in the questionnaire survey and interviews, for providing valuable information for this study and for giving access to construction sites and manufacturing plants.
