Applying fuzzy techniques to cash flow analysis
To cite this article: A. H. Boussabaine & Taha Elhag (1999) Applying fuzzy techniques to cash flow analysis, Construction Management & Economics, 17: 6, 745-755, DOI:
To link to this article:
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
Construction Management and Economics (1999) 17, 745± 755
Applying fuzzy techniques to cash ¯ ow analysis
A.H. BOUSSABAINE and TAHA ELHAG
School of Architecture and Building Engineering, University of Liverpool, Leverhulme Building, Abercromby Square, Liverpool L69 3BX, UK
Received 20 February 1998; accepted 29 October 1998
Construction managers are interested in the direction of movement of cash ¯ ow at valuation periods rather than its forecast value, and fuzzy set theory applied to decision making might help in this process. Fuzzy models are particularly suited to making decisions involving new technologies where uncertainties inherent in the situation are complex. The problem of healthy cash ¯ ow at valuation periods relates to the proper estimation of cash in and out ¯ ows and project progress. The paper presents an alternative approach to cash ¯ ow analysis for construction projects. This project is based on the assumption that cash ¯ ow at particular valuation stages of a project is ambiguous. The paper discusses the weaknesses of existing methods for cash ¯ ow and establishes the need for an alternative approach. Using an example of 30 cash ¯ ow curves, the advantage of fuzzy cash ¯ ow analysis is demonstrated. Results of the analysis are presented and discussed. The model can be used to analyse the cash ¯ ow curve of projects at any progress period to make sure it is reasonable.
fuzzy, cash ¯ ow, valuation, fuzzy techniques, progress

The magnitude and timing of future cash ¯ ows need to be estimated carefully, taking into consideration the related risks and uncertainties. The major problem that managers encounter in making ® nancial decisions involves both the uncertainty and the ambiguity surrounding expected cash ¯ ows (Eldin, 1989). In the case of complex projects the problems of uncertainty and ambiguity assume even greater proportions because of the dif® culty in predicting the impact of unexpected changes on construction progress and, consequently, on cash ¯ ows. The uncertainty and ambiguity are caused not only by project-related problems but also by economic and technological factors (Laufer and Coheca, 1990). Generally, cash ¯ ows are spread over several time periods (valuation periods) and are dominated by project-related constraints and by environmental (external) constraints over which construction managers have little control. If the cash ¯ ows are not planned at early stages (precontract) of the project and are spread over a number of periods, the problems of uncertainty and ambiguity become serious (Teicholz, 1994). Several methods have been used for cash ¯ ow analysis and forecasting. These include probabilistic analysis and statistical analysis (Kaka and Price, 1993; Singh and Woon,
Teicholz, 1993). In probabilistic analysis, statistical measures (mean and standard deviation) of input variables are used to estimate the mean and standard deviation of the results. This approach is precluded if the factors that in¯ uence cash ¯ ow have a nonprobabilistic nature. Commonly, statistical methods are used to deal with the problem of uncertainty in cash ¯ ow prospects (Teicholz, 1993). None of these approaches addresses the problem of ambiguity in the construction process because events and even probabilities associated with them are not always mutually exclusive.
Construction Management and Economics
ISSN 0144± 6193 print/ISSN 1466-433X online  1999 Taylor & Francis Ltd
A fuzzy theory approach as developed by Zadeh (1965) is useful for cash ¯ ow analysis where a cash ¯ ow at valuation periods is uncertain. The fuzzy set approach has been applied widely to help in real life decision-making processes. Fuzzy theory is ® nding wide popularity in various applications that include management, economics and engineering (Zadeh, 1994). The theory was introduced by Zadeh (1965) three decades ago, but only recently has its application gained momentum. Fuzzy logic deals with uncertain or imprecise situations and decisions. Although fuzzy theory deals with imprecise information, it is based on sound quantitative mathematical theory (Chen and Hang, 1992). A variable in fuzzy logic has sets of values which are characterized by linguistic expression, such as very high cash ¯ ow, average cash ¯ ow, low cash ¯ ow, etc. These linguistic expressions are represented numerically by fuzzy sets. Every fuzzy set is characterized by a membership function, which varies from 0 to 1. Fuzzy sets have a distinct feature of allowing partial membership. A given element can be a member of a fuzzy set, with degree of membership varying from 0 (non-member) to 1 (full member), in contrast to crisp or conventional sets, where an element can either be or not be part of the set. Linguistic variables as described by Zadeh (1995) provide a means of modelling human tolerance for imprecision by encoding decision-relevant information into labels of fuzzy sets. Fuzzy technologies are an approximation that can be used to model decision processes for which mathematical precision is impossible or impractical.
The purpose of this paper is to present an alternative approach for determining (analysing) the expected value of cash ¯ ows, based on fuzzy set theory. This approach takes into account the vagueness and ambiguities inherent in the estimation of projects’ cash ¯ ows at valuation stages.
Fuzziness of cash ¯ ow
A large number of methods exist for cash ¯ ow analysis. Most of these methods are based on single standard cost S curves (Singh and Woon, 1984; Kaka and Price, 1993; Teicholz, 1993). The accuracy of these models in representing the real world depends on whether the conditions assumed accurately represent the situation to be analysed (Boussabaine and Kaka, 1998). The S curve method is a very simpli® ed approach for analysing receipts and payments at different stages of project progress. In a typical project, the cost accrual assumes the following pattern ( Cooke and Jepson, 1979): (1.) during the ® rst third of the project duration, the cost accumulates in a parabolic pattern to achieve one-quarter of the costs incurred at one-third-project duration; (2.) during the second third of the project duration, the cost accumulates in a linear fashion such that at two-thirds project duration the accumulated costs total three-quarters of the project total costs; and (3.) during the ® nal third of the project duration, the cost accumulation is a mirror image of the ® rst third duration, to achieve 100% cost at physical completion.
The following equations are used to model cash ¯ ow curves as de® ned above:
where x is the cumulative proportion of project duration (0 ² x ² 1), and y is the cumulative proportion of project budget cost or value (0 ² y ² 1).
These equations of cash ¯ ow representation allow precise descriptions. By contrast, the fuzzy approach to cash ¯ ow analysis extends to subjective phenomena. It includes the use of approximate reasoning by which managers model how meaningful information can be obtained from imprecise data presented to them on work progress (receipts and payment statements). Hence, in this work interim payments are dealt with as fuzzy concepts (sets) to re¯ ect their uncertainty and ambiguity. Here fuzzy sets at any payment period introduce vagueness (with the aim of reducing complexity and increasing accuracy of representation) by eliminating the sharp boundary between different possible cash ¯ ow sums at a particular payment period. Thus, if a payment period is a member of a fuzzy set, the values of its membership function are between 0 and 1.
The uncertainty in cash ¯ ow at a particular payment period is modelled by three intervals: low cash ¯ ow, medium cash ¯ ow (the most likely) and high cash ¯ ow. The estimate of these intervals might be based on a
manager’s experience and judgement or on statistical analysis of the payment periods from historical data of past similar construction projects. These intervals can be changed to suit a particular project or situation using relevant experience and know-how from the past. In this study the value of these intervals is estimated as a function of the mean, standard deviation and con® dence level of cash ¯ ow at any period of the project’s progress. These interval values are used to construct the membership function of possible cash ¯ ow at any period of a project’s progress. Therefore, the above equations might be fuzzi® ed as ¯ ows:
where m (x) is the membership function of the cumulative proportion of project cost (0 # x # 1). The method used to estimate the value of m (x) is discussed in the next section.
Data used in the study
The actual data used in this study correspond to projects that are 100% complete and carried out under the Institute of Civil Engineers Standard Conditions of Contract. All of the projects used were of a duration ranging from 1 year to 2 years, and 30 cases were acquired for this study. For each set of data the ratio of present cumulative cost against ® nal cumulative cost was plotted against the percentage completion of the project, thus producing the sample S curves. Each of these curves was then divided into nine time periods corresponding to 10%, 20%, 30%, . . . , 90% completion. The ratio of the cumulative cost to ® nal cumulative cost was then read off for each of the periods. Samples of these curves are shown in Figure 1. General statistical analysis of the data is shown in Table 1. Table 2 shows the correlation between the interim payment stages and it is seen that the correlation between the interim stage payments is very low. This indicates that interim payment is statistically independent. Also as can be seen from Table 2, most of the payment stages are positively correlated.
Determination of the membership functions
Number of missing values
The most important step in the design of fuzzy decision support systems is the determination of the membership functions of the sets. There are many guidelines on developing the membership functions for fuzzy sets (Dubois and Prade, 1980). The methods, which have Table 1 General statistics of the data used in the study
Figure 1	Sample of curves used in the study
Table 2	Correlation matrix between the interim payment stages
been used in the past, are often heuristically based. The sets based on statistics are perhaps some of the most naturally fuzzy sets that can be used. Any measurement based on statistics must make some allowance for deviation from the value obtained by the measurement. Another advantage of statistically based membership functions is that they are naturally quantitative, that is, there is reason to believe that the membership function has a relationship to some physical property of the set. Hence, this paper uses these criteria which result in a simpli® ed but accurate method of de® ning membership functions for cash ¯ ow groups of fuzzy sets (valuation periods or progress periods) which are statistically based. In this paper statistically based fuzzy cash ¯ ow sets are those whose membership function is based upon the mean and standard deviation of a de® ning feature of its members in the universes of discourse. A more complicated method based on the probability density function of the cash ¯ ow at each progress period can be used (Civanlar and Trussell, 1986). The problem now is how to use these statistical measures of a cash ¯ ow period of the elements of a fuzzy set to construct its membership function. In order to de® ne a representative membership function, there are conditions which can be imposed to make the set have properties consistent with the subjective judgement of a decision-maker and the underlying statistics of the cash ¯ ow periods. From a heuristic point of view, the elements which are most likely (e.g. at mean) should have high membership values, however, the set should be as selective as possible. These sets of conditions might be quantitatively represented (Civanlar and Trussell, 1986) as follows.
E{m (x)} | x is distributed according to the underlying mean and standard deviation.
2. 0 # m (x) # 1 this is because an in® nite scale will not be necessary to assign grade of memberships, and [0,1] is the classical interval over which the membership functions are de® ned.
3. ¦ m (x)2 should be minimized: this is because, the number of parameters in the functional representation should be as small as possible.
The fuzzy membership of x de® ned as, m (x) Î
[0, 1], are estimated by using the following formulae.
(a) For low cash ¯ ow
(b) For medium cash ¯ ow
(c) For high cash ¯ ow
Here a is the mean and b is the standard deviation. The above formulae indicate that there is a central member (a) for which m (x) is greater than its peripheral members. Here b is a controlling scale factor. These parameters modify the shape and spread of the m (x) obtained in the above equations, as shown in Figure 2. The scale values indicated on the horizontal axis represent cash ¯ ow level using mean, standard deviation and variances. The fuzziness is increased or decreased by the central prototype a, and the spread parameter b. The parameter b determines the fuzziness of peripheral members. Since the mean is an unbiased estimate for any sample set, it is an ideal choice for a. It is very convenient to express the membership function of a fuzzy subset of the real line in terms of a standard function whose parameters may be adjusted to ® t a speci® ed membership function in an approximate fashion. Figure 2 shows a graphical representation of these equations. Table 3 shows data extracted from Table 1 for developing membership functions for interim payment periods. Figure 2 shows the range of medium cash ¯ ow
Figure 2	Membership functions of cumulative costs
Table 3	Data used for developing membership functions

Period 1 at 10% progress
Period 2 at 20% progress
Period 5 at 50% progress
Period 6 at 60% progress
Period 7 at 70% progress
Period 8 at 80% progress
Period 9 at 90% progress
values from (a ± 2b) to (a + 2b), with the highest degree of membership occurring at the value of (a ± 2b) for low cash ¯ ow, (a) for medium cash ¯ ow and at (a + 2b) for high cash ¯ ow. To avoid negative cash ¯ ow at early stages of the project progress for period 1, the highest degree of membership for low cash ¯ ow occurs at the value (a ± b). In this respect it can be argued (assuming the distribution is normal) that 95% cash ¯ ow will lie within the limits of these membership functions. Figure 3 shows membership functions of the nine interim valuation periods used in this work.
This approach provides useful information for decision makers without imposing an inappropriate degree of precision, and avoids measurement problems associated with the derivation of a single measure of cash ¯ ow at any particular period of a project’s progress.
Fuzzy cash ¯ ow analysis
Figure 3	Membership functions of periods 1± 9
Linguistic variables as described by Zadeh (1993) provide a means of modelling human tolerance for imprecision by encoding decision relevant information
into labels of fuzzy sets. Fuzzy techniques are an approximation that can be used to model decision processes for which mathematical precision is impossible or impractical. In the case of cash ¯ ow management, the shortcomings in traditional techniques for decision making under uncertainty may be addressed through the use of fuzzy systems theory, fuzzy aggregation, and fuzzy logic (Chen, 1985; Chen and Hang, 1992). Zadeh (1965) de® ned set intersection, union, and complement operators for fuzzy sets. For an intersection the resulting membership function was expressed as the minimum of two or more fuzzy sets, and the union of two fuzzy sets was de® ned as the maximum of two or more fuzzy sets. These operations are de® ned as follows:
The remainder of this section demonstrates the application of fuzzy aggregation techniques to assess cash ¯ ow as a means of understanding cash ¯ ow forecasts. Aggregation techniques provide appropriate handling of variables for decision making with goals and constraints.
In an analysis of risk due to earthquakes, Dong and Wong (1985) employ a fuzzy averages technique with linguistic variables to evaluate structural risk. It is this approach that the authors have chosen for assessment of cash ¯ ow at valuation periods. Recent work on this domain has developed a number of formulations. Among these formulation are fuzzy aggregation and fuzzy logic. These two techniques are used in this paper to demonstrate the application of fuzzy aggregation techniques to the problem of cash ¯ ow analysis at valuation periods. A commonly encountered problem in cash ¯ ow and decision making is the valuation of different cash ¯ ow alternatives. In a case where the value of the alternatives can be measured through fuzzy membership functions, the membership function can provide a means of evaluating trade off between cash ¯ ow alternatives. Suppose that A1, A2, . . . , An represent cash ¯ ow alternatives in a universe of alternatives X1, X1, . . . , Xn, respectively, for achieving a given goal m (y) (maximum cash ¯ ow) then:
The above equation does not provide a means for assessing the importance of each alternative against the rest of possible outcomes. Dubois and Prade (1984) developed an approach for weighting goals to provide appropriate emphasis on each alternative using the following equation:
This equation is dif® cult to compute, and requires nonlinear programming techniques for evaluation. This problem has been solved by Dong and Wong, (1987) by developing an approximation technique that involves a cuts (horizontal cross-sections at various levels of membership) and interval analysis. Cash ¯ ow alternatives at different valuation periods are represented by S1, S2 , . . . , Sm and the criteria that are used in the assessment of these alternatives are a 1, a 2, . . . , a n (hence the name of `a cuts’). Then for a chosen alternative Si the relative merit criterion a j is evaluated by a membership function m ij(x). Also, the relative importance or the degree of belief in each criterion of selection of an alternative cash ¯ ow is assessed by a weighting coef® cient Wj for criterion a j. Therefore, the cash ¯ ow alternative receives the following weighted average membership.
This equation is used to evaluate cash ¯ ow sets at different payment stages of a project. For these purpose three linguistic variables, low, medium and high, are used to evaluate cash ¯ ow. Linguistic variables provide a means of modelling human tolerance for imprecision by encoding decision-relevant information into labels of fuzzy sets (Zadeh, 1995). By evaluating cash ¯ ow in terms of linguistic approximation a multi-answer to a crisp (singleton) problem can be provided, allowing decision-makers to test different alternatives for cash ¯ ow.
Application
The process used to compute and develop fuzzy cash ¯ ow curves is shown in Figure 4. The ® rst stage in this process is the development of membership functions (MBF) and the de® nition of their linguistic variables. Linguistic variables are used to translate real values into linguistic values. The possible values of a linguistic variable are not numbers but so called `linguistic terms’. For example, to translate the real variable `cash ¯ ow’ into a linguistic variable, three terms (low, medium and high) cash ¯ ow are de® ned. This stage will be followed by the development of cash ¯ ow membership functions at every valuation period and the weight membership. The membership function of cash ¯ ow periods was discussed previously. Weights can be expressed in either numeric (crisp) or linguistic (fuzzy) terms. All the weights must be de® ned in the same manner. This work uses linguistic weights
Figure 4	Fuzzy analysis ¯ ow chart
for the purpose of demonstrating the use of a fuzzy weighted average in cash ¯ ow analysis. In this study linguistic weights are expressed in terms of degree of belief that the cash ¯ ow will be low, medium or high. Figure 5 shows the membership function (fuzzy sets) for the degree of belief (weights) of the nine progress periods. Table 4 shows that there are nine possible combinations of cash ¯ ow for every valuation period. Each of these combinations might also have several alternatives depending on the degree of membership of the selected combination. Each combination represents an S curve. Table 5 shows cash ¯ ows at different project valuation periods, with their associated degree of belief (weight). These weights are assigned randomly
Figure 5	Membership functions of belief in cash ¯ ow
for the purpose of demonstrating the concept of fuzzy cash ¯ ow curves.
The use of the information presented in Table 4 in cash ¯ ow analysis decision-making is illustrated by the following example of a fuzzy-weighted average computation. Figure 6 illustrates the process of a cuts and demonstrates an example of fuzzy computation (in this case WX). Figure 4 shows a fuzzy analysis ¯ ow chart. In order to compute Equation 16, summing the weight variables derives the denominator (i.e. · W ). When all weights have been summed, the denominator of Equation 16 is evaluated for each cash ¯ ow forecast under consideration (e.g. In order to derive
Figure 6	Example of fuzzy computation
Table 4	Possible combinations of cash ¯ ow at each valuation period
Low cash ¯ ow (L)
Medium cash ¯ ow (M)
High cash ¯ ow (H)
Moderately optimistic (m)
this, the linguistic value for each cash ¯ ow forecast (e.g. low) must be multiplied by its respective degree of belief and these products are then summed (i.e. · WX) as shown in Figures 4 and 6. This involves multiplication of the fuzzy sets representing cash ¯ ow followed by a summation of the products. This forms the numerator of Equation 16, which is then divided
Table 5	Examples of fuzzy cash ¯ ow analysis a
Belief	Cash ¯ ow


a Y = · WX /· W where W is the degree of belief and X is cash ¯ ow
by the denominator. The weights of the degree of belief are summed to obtain another fuzzy set, which represents the ® nal membership of the cash ¯ ow (Figure 5). Construction decision makers might work directly with this fuzzy set or defuzzify (it using one of the available methods for this purpose) to determine a single value that represents cash ¯ ow at a particular
Figure 7	Fuzzy cash ¯ ow curves
period of project progress. Alpha cuts at various levels of membership levels of 0.0, 0.5 and 1 are used here, although a cuts may be taken at other intervals, depending on the level of precision desired.
As an example, the cash ¯ ow for period 3 (30% progress) is assumed uncertain and cannot be expressed as a precise number. In such cases, several cash ¯ ow alternatives may exist for a given scenario with varying degrees of belief in them. Low pessimistic (Lp), moderate optimistic (Mm), and high optimistic (Ho) cash ¯ ow combination are selected from Table 4 to illustrate the computation of the expected cash ¯ ow. The corresponding cash ¯ ow curves for the combination shown in Table 4 will be fuzzy sets:
Figure 8	Comparison between defuzzi® ed and statistical curves
There are two ways to defuzzify the set and obtain the expected cash ¯ ow at any valuation period. With the ® rst method, competing alternatives are ignored and construction manager picks the alternative in which he believes the most. For example, the cash ¯ ow with the highest membership function (belief) in the S0 curve is 0.7 | 0.468. In the second approach the average of the whole set of competing alternatives (Lp, Mm, Ho) is calculated. This requires the calculation of the centre of gravity of the cash ¯ ow for predicted amounts of (low, medium and high) cash ¯ ow. Equation 16 is used for this purpose. The expected cash ¯ ow for this period is
The same process can be applied for computing cash ¯ ow at any level of membership function. The rest of the computation is summarized in Table 5. Figure 7 compares the cash ¯ ow curves for different scenarios at different levels of membership. These ® gures show clearly that the defuzzi® ed cash ¯ ow curve is a good compromise between pessimistic, moderate and high cash ¯ ow alternatives. However, the shape of this curve is affected greatly by the ambiguity of the cash ¯ ow and the degree of belief (weight) assigned to each valuation period. Figure 8 shows a comparison between the mean curve of the 30 projects and defuzzi® ed curves at 0, 0.5 and 1 membership. Note that the 0.5 membership curve is very close to the mean curve. This is just a coincidence since the shape of the fuzzy curve is dependent on the amount of cash ¯ ow as well as the degree of belief in this cash ¯ ow. Figure 9 shows examples of typical anticipated cash ¯ ow curves. Observe how the low con® dence in cash ¯ ow at 40% of project progress for 0.5 membership affects the cash ¯ ow. Also, cash ¯ ow at 70% progress for full membership is affected.
Figure 9	Defuzzi® ed cash ¯ ow curves
The usefulness and practical implication of this work are discussed in detail in Boussabaine and Kaka (1998). This model provides a relatively neat and compact means of taking into account many linguistic possibilities (ambiguities) in cash ¯ ow analysis. However, the variables involved must be independent. It is impossible to satisfy this restriction every time. Therefore, when the variables involved are interactive, a hybrid model may be used that involves the method described here and fuzzy logic which allows for relationships among variables. Further research will explore this and extract rules of thumb from the cash ¯ ow curves presented in this study. Then this information will be used to develop and train a neuro-fuzzy model for cash ¯ ow forecasting.
This paper demonstrates how fuzzy sets can be used to describe ambiguous terms that often are encountered in cash ¯ ow analysis at any valuation period of a project’s progress. An alternative to the traditional method of analysing expected values of cash ¯ ows at different project stages is presented. The approach is based on the assumption that cash ¯ ows at different stages of the project progress are ambiguous. The cash ¯ ow curves of 30 projects were analysed and the expected cash ¯ ow curves were obtained using fuzzy averaging techniques. Defuzzi® ed cash ¯ ow curves were found to be a good compromise between different cash ¯ ow scenarios. However, the input variables must be independent. It is impossible to satisfy this restriction everytime. Therefore, further research will examine the interaction between the input variables.
