See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at:
Evaluation and management of foreign exchange and revenue risks in China's BOT projects
Article  in  Construction Management and Economics · February 2000
10.1080/014461900370825 · Source:
CITATIONS	READS
4 authors, including:
Tsinghua University	Nanyang Technological University
110 PUBLICATIONS   4,843 CITATIONS   	137 PUBLICATIONS   4,346 CITATIONS
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
Construction productivity View project
Adaptive robotic work cell for standard precast construction unit manufacturing View project
All content following this page was uploaded by Robert L. K. Tiong on 01 June 2015.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
Construction Management and Economics (2000) 18, 197± 207
Evaluation and management of foreign exchange and revenue risks in China’s BOT projects
1Department of Building and Real Estate, National University of Singapore
2School of Civil and Structural Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3College of Engineering, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
Received 4 September 1998; accepted 14 January 1999
China is actively investigating ways to introduce project ® nancing, speci® cally through the build-operatetransfer (BOT) scheme to meet the needs for the country’s infrastructure and to be attractive to foreign investors and lenders. The advent of concession agreements, backed by new BOT laws, will be a positive move forward to achieving project-® nanced infrastructure projects. There are thus opportunities especially in the power sector for foreign investors. However, it is important to identify and manage the unique or critical risks associated with China’s BOT projects. This is especially so after policies were introduced in late 1996 when the ® rst state-approved BOT project, the US$650 million 2 ´ 350 megawatt (MW) coal® red Laibin B Power Plant (Laibin B), was awarded. They include a competitive tendering process and 100% foreign ownership of the operating company. This paper is based on the ® ndings from an international survey on risk management of BOT projects in developing countries, with emphasis on power projects in China. It discusses speci® cally the criticality of foreign exchange and revenue risks which include exchange rate and convertibility risk, ® nancial closing risk, dispatch constraint risk and tariff adjustment risk. The measures for mitigating each of these risks are discussed also.
Introduction
The economic growth in the People’s Republic of China (PRC) has resulted in a strong demand for basic infrastructure like roads, ports and power generation facilities. The World Bank has estimated that China’s expenditures in infrastructure will rank top among all East Asian countries and is expected to account for US$750 billion over the period from 1995 to 2004. Road and power projects command top priority. For example, China plans to boost the total installed capacity (TIC) of electric power by 90 gigawatts, i.e. 40% of current TIC. This requires a total investment of US$100 billion, about 25% of which will come from foreign capital investment (China Statistical Bureau, 1979± 1997; Lianhe Zaobao, 1996; Chen, 1997; NWI, 1997). To meet the development needs, the Chinese government has granted concessions based on the build-operate-transfer (BOT) model for infrastructure projects. Several state-approved BOT projects have been awarded since late 1996, such as the Shanghai Da Chang water project, Changsha power project and Chengdu water project (Bi, 1996;
1997a± d Chew, 1997; Infrastructure Finance, 1997). There are thus opportunities especially in the power and road sectors for foreign investors.
Construction Management and Economics
ISSN 0144± 6193 print/ISSN 1466-433X online  2000 Taylor & Francis Ltd
Despite the opportunities, undertaking infrastructure business in China presents its risks and obstacles.
traditional methods of project ® nance and risk allocation mechanisms that are available in other countries generally do not yet exist in China, or are restricted. Therefore the effective application of risk management principles to projects is especially crucial to successful investment in China, and risk strategies have to be incorporated much earlier in the development of their projects (Tiong, 1992, 1995a; Zhang et al., 1998). In addition, there are some innovations that have been introduced since late 1996 when the ® rst stateapproved BOT project, Laibin B Power Plant (Laibin B), was awarded (He, 1996; Wang, 1996; Zhang, 1996a; Zhu and Li, 1996; Orr, 1997), such as the competitive tendering process and 100% foreign ownership of the operating company. Successful tenderers will have to ® nance their projects from a revenue stream based on letters of comfort from the provincial government supporting off-take agreements instead of the guaranteed returns that have characterized earlier BOT projects in China.
Laibin B is the second phase project for Laibin Power Plant with an estimated capacity of 2 ´ 350 megawatt (MW) coal-® red units and an estimated cost of US$650 million (5 billion Renminbi (RMB) yuan). It is located in Laibin county of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region (Guangxi), a Chinese backwater southern province. The concession terms require a very tight completion schedule and appear to offer a relatively low rate of return. The Electricite de France (EdF) and GEC Alsthom consortium ® nally won the concession from ® ve other shortlisted tenderers with a very aggressive tender and the backing of France’s export-credit agency, Coface (Bridge of Trust, 1996).
Due to the characteristics of the BOT concept, it is meaningful to study in detail the unique or critical risks associated with its application in China and to investigate the corresponding mitigating measures.
Research objectives
Since late 1980s, research work has been carried out to study the risk management of BOT projects in developing countries (Tiong, 1990, 1992, 1995a; McCarthy and Tiong, 1991;
Nielsen, 1997; Ruster, 1997; Staigerwald, 1997; Westring, 1997) such as in China (He and Tiong, 1996; Platt and Arstall, 1996; Shen et al., 1996; Chen, 1997; Wang et al., 1998a, b; Zhang et al., 1998). However, there has been little research to date that focused speci® cally on the management of unique or critical risks of China BOT projects.
The process of risk management consists of risk identi® cation, analysis and risk mitigation; followed by con® rmation that the risk mitigation measures were implemented adequately (Staigerwald, 1997). One important goal of this study therefore is to identify the unique or critical risks associated with China’s BOT projects which are different from those in other sectors and in other developing countries. These risks are unique or critical to the foreign investors and developers; hence special attention has to be paid in taking corresponding mitigating measures. The objectives of the study are: 1. to identify the unique or critical political and currency risks associated with China’s BOT projects; 2. to evaluate the effectiveness of mitigating measures that are available to manage these risks; and 3. to provide a risk management framework as guidelines for project promoters planning to invest in future BOT projects in China.
Although the objectives have been achieved successfully in the course of the research, it is not possible to report the ® ndings in full in this paper. As the title of the paper has indicated, this paper will report on the criticality of foreign exchange and revenue risks and the effectiveness of their mitigating measures.
The methodology developed for this study includes: 1. a comprehensive literature review together with some case studies to identify an initial list of unique or critical risks associated with BOT projects and mitigating measures for these risks; 2. unstructured interviews and discussions to ® lter the risks and measures identi® ed in the above step; 3. a survey via questionnaires sent to project sponsors, developers, lenders, investors and contractors to evaluate the criticality of these risks and the effectiveness of corresponding mitigating measures; and 4. case studies to provide additional insight concerning contract clauses and risk management frameworks for investing in China’s future BOT infrastructure projects.
The projects studied were the ® rst provincialapproved BOT project in China, the Shajiao B Power Plant in Guangdong Province, and the ® rst stateapproved BOT project in China, the Laibin B in Guangxi Province. Other BOT projects in China, the Yan’an Second Tunnel and Da Chang Water Plant in
Shanghai, Changsha Power Plant in Hunan Province, Tangshan Power Plant in Hebei Province, etc., were referred to also (Zhang et al., 1999; Wang et al., 1999a, b; Tiong, 1990; Chew, 1997; Guangxi, 1995; Bridge of Trust, 1996; Infrastructure Finance, 1997; PFI, 1996d, 1997a, c, d). About 50 risks in 6 categories associated with BOT power projects were identi® ed (B&M, 1996; World Bank and USAID, 1994; Macdonald, 1997; New Civil Engineer, 1994; PFI, 1997b) as shown in Table 1.
change in law development approvals adverse Government action or inaction
reliability and creditworthiness of local parties
provision of utilities increase in taxes (general) increase in taxes (speci® c) political force majeure events termination of concession by
Government payment failure by Government
Construction risks
cost overrun increases in ® nancing cost time and quality risk contractor default default by concession company time, cost and scope of identi® ed but related work and variations
environmental damage ± subsisting environmental damage ± ongoing protection of geological and historical object construction force majeure events
termination of concession by concession company
prolonged downtime during operation condition of facility (maintenance)
¯ uctuating demand of power generated
transmission failure problem in bill collection insuf® cient other income power theft
¯ uctuate of cost and availability of fuel/coal
Government restriction on pro® t and tariff
in¯ ation risk interest rate foreign currency exchange rate foreign currency convertibility
title/lease property ownership assets security structure
insolvency of concession company breach of ® nancing documents enforceability of security documentation/contractual risk (con¯ ict and arbitration, applied laws)
Table 1 List of risks associated with BOT projects The interviews and discussions focused on the initial list of political and currency risks associated with China’s BOT projects and corresponding mitigating measures. Participants included the Director of Business Development of Foster Wheeler and 35 construction professionals. The setting for the discussion was a group workshop. The participants were selected based on their experiences with project risks and their knowledge of China’s regulatory frameworks and business operations. The second author acted as the facilitator and the note-taking was done by the ® rst author. From the workshop, the ® nal list of unique or critical political and currency risks and corresponding mitigating measures was compiled as shown in Table 2, with the risks identi® ed and categorized into two groups, political and force majeure risks, and foreign exchange and revenue risks. The subject of this paper is on foreign exchange and revenue risks which include principally the exchange rate and convertibility risk, the ® nancial closing risk, the dispatch transmission constraint and tariff adjustment.
Based on Table 2, a comprehensive questionnaire for international survey was then designed. There were three parts: question 1 on criticality of risks, question 2 on effectiveness of the proposed mitigating measures and question 3 on adequacy of related clauses in Laibin B contracts. This paper reports on the ® ndings related to foreign exchange risks from questions 1 and 2. The rating systems for the criticality of each risk and the effectiveness of generally available measures for mitigating these risks are shown in Table 3.
The international survey was conducted from December 1997 to March 1998. Three hundred questionnaires were sent by post to international project sponsors, developers, consultants, lawyers, lenders, investors and contractors. A total of 40 valid responses was received which accounts for a response rate of about 13.3%. Although the response rate was a little low, the reliability of the survey results is high because all of the respondents are at top management level in their companies. More importantly, most (75%) of them have experience on international BOT projects, almost all (88%) of them have business experience in China and more than half (60%) of them have been involved directly in BOT projects in China. The detailed respondents’ particulars are shown in Table 4.
Exchange rate and convertibility risk
For investment in China’s power or other infrastructure projects, the foreign companies will invariably receive nearly all of their revenues in Ren Min Bi (RMB).
Table 2	Political and currency risks of China BOT infrastructure projects and mitigating measures
Insurance for political risk.
relationship with
government authorities
especially of® cers at state or provincial level.

relationship with
(JV) with local partners
Government authorities
especially the Central
especially of® cers at state
Government agency or
state-owned enterprise.
Establish JV with local
partners especially the
relationship with
establish a one-stop agency
Central Government agencies or state-owned enterprises.
or extend concession.
Establish JV with local
Rely on a combination of
Obtain support of
partners especially the
sponsor’s Government,
Central Government
and insurance policies
agency or state-owned enterprise.
Maintain good relationship Appoint independent
and credit-
and other information
with Government of® cers 	accountant to audit the

at state or provincial level. Chinese entities.

choose the most capable

Obtain Government’s
or extend concession period.
® nance help if needed.
Obtain Government’s
Use dual-currency 	Use hedging tools,

guarantees of exchange rate and convertibility, e.g.
xed rate or to adjust
contracts, with certain 	e.g. forward, swap.
portions to be paid in RMB and other transactions
tariff or extend concession
to cover the cost.
Adopt alternatives to
cooperation with
offerings on stock to
Enter into take-or-pay
Government to guarantee
transmission power purchase
contracts with Government that transmission line will
constraint	arrangements with power
authorities to dispatch 	be ready for dispatch.
purchaser (Government).
power plant at full capacity for a minimum number of hours each year.
Tariff 	Have a formula for tariff
Maintain good relations 	Separate and re-de® ne
with Government and a 	tariff, e.g. portions of tariff
positive public image of 	® xed while portions
calculation of tariffs
the project.	adjusted, or portions to be

paid in foreign currency.
Table 3 Rating systems for criticality of risks and effectiveness of mitigating measures
Rating 	Criticality score	of unique or
Effectiveness of mitigating measure
0 Not applicable
1 Not critical
2 Fairly critical
4 Very critical
Not applicable Not effective
Fairly effective

Very effective Extremely effective
Table 4	Respondents’ particulars of the int survey


(Vice-) managing director	16
Others (consultant, partner,
With BOT experience internationally 30
With business experience in China	35
With BOT experience in China	24
signi® cant portion of this revenue will need to be converted to other currencies, primarily US dollars, and remitted outside of China. The remittances are used to meet foreign currency obligations to equipment suppliers, to repay borrowings from foreign lenders and to make payments to the companies in respect of equity distributions and shareholder loans. The RMB is not freely convertible into US dollars; even if it is convertible (currently only convertibility on current account is available and it was introduced in Dec. 1996), the exchange rate ¯ uctuates all the time in the market or subject to the approval of the State Administration for Exchange Control (SAEC). Although the approval to convert RMB into foreign currencies and to remit foreign currencies outside China is routine for approved foreign investment enterprises, there can be no assurance that the Chinese Government will continue to provide such approvals.
Financial closing risk
Financial closing occurs when all the conditions of lenders have been met and the loan facilities are arranged. Financial closing risk includes the dif® culty in raising the ® nance, the high cost of ® nancing and even being unable to close ® nancing within the time frame stipulated in the concession agreement. Generally this is due to the high level of perceived risks in China’s BOT power projects. The success or failure in raising ® nance depends on fair risk allocation and a sound contractual structure. There is a need to establish enhanced credibility for the BOT project because ultimately the ® nancial market will judge the project on its own merits without the traditional Government repayment guarantees.
In China, the power grids are in the monopoly of the Government enterprises. Dispatch constraint risk exists as the power plant is subject to Governmental and electric power regulation in virtually all aspects of its operations, including the amount and timing of electricity generation, performance of scheduled maintenance and compliance with power grid control and dispatch directives. To the extent that substantial new transmission construction is required in relation to an independent power project, the power bureau may be faced with the question of how to ® nance the capacity expansion. This may lead to delay in the construction of the new transmission line. The power bureau may subsequently refuse to pay or may re-negotiate the scope of payments, especially if the Government’s resources are under pressure due to dif® cult economic times and if the demand for power is below forecast.
For power plants with foreign investment, tariffs payable under power purchase agreement (PPA) entered into by foreign project developer are established on the basis of tariff formulas which are agreed upon after discussions among the company’s directors, its local partner, the prospective power purchaser, the local governments, the pricing bureau and the relevant planning commission. Once established, the tariffs are subject to annual review by the pricing bureau and adjustments are in accordance with the formulas. Usually the tariff formulas contained in the PPA are structured to permit the foreign developer to pay the operating expenses of the plant, the ® nancing costs of each particular project and to enable the developer to realize a return on its investment. While the relevant China pricing bureaux may agree to utilize the adjustment formulas, there is no assurance that the formulas would not be re-negotiated and subsequently changed. There is therefore the risk that the adjustment is not enough to cover increased cost due to various reasons, such as, force majeure and changes in laws.
Criticality of risks
Table 5 shows the criticality of the foreign exchange and revenue risks. The ranking of the risk factors as well as the mitigating measures in the next section are based on the averages of the respondents’ scores. The factor with the highest mean score would be ranked 1 and so on. There are 3 categories of ranking in Table 5 based on the mean scores of (a) all the responses, (b) only the banking and accounting professionals, and (c) responses from the other groups. There are three main conclusions: (i) all the factors are considered critical as their mean scores are above 3.0; (ii) the rankings by the respondents in groups (b) and (c) are different for the ® rst 3 risks, the banking and accounting professionals having viewed foreign exchange and tariff adjustment as having a higher level of criticality than dispatch constraint while the other respondents regarded dispatch constraint as the most critical risk; and (iii) the ® nancial closing risk is considered as very critical (4.06) by the non-® nance professionals while the level of criticality as rated by the ® nance professionals is lower at 3.40, and the reason could be that the non-® nance professionals were unfamiliar with the uncertainties related to work involved in ® nancial closing.
A detailed analysis of each of the factors is presented in this section. As shown in Table 5, tariff adjustment is deemed as the most critical risk, with a mean score of 4.50 based on all the responses. The reasons could be: 1. the Chinese government usually insists on renegotiating tariffs each year to control in¯ ation, thus rendering overall project revenues and rates of return unpredictable; 2. the adjustment is subject to the approval of a Government price control authority at central or provincial level; 3. there is confusion in the international investment community with regard to perceived `price caps’ or rate of return imposed by Chinese authorities. While the Government’s State Planning Commission (SPC) has declared that there are no such policies, several developers have complained about a 15% cap on a project’s rate of return. If such caps do, in fact, exist, they signi® cantly reduce the viability of infrastructure investment projects since they limit foreign companies’ ability to balance Chinese risks with corresponding returns.
Table 5	Ranking of criticality of foreign exchange and revenue risks
Other respondents



Dispatch constraint
Dispatch constraint risk is ranked the second most critical risk in the overall category, with a mean score of 4.36. The reasons for its criticality are that, similar to electric power companies in other countries, BOT power plants in China are subject to governmental and electric power regulation in virtually all aspects of their operations. These include the amount and timing of electricity generation, the setting of electric power tariffs, performance of scheduled maintenance, and compliance with power grid control and dispatch directives. There can be no assurance that these regulations and restrictions will not change in the future in a manner which could adversely affect the operations of the power plants. In addition, foreign ownership of electric power plants in China is also restricted or controlled in varying degrees for the electric grids in China are all owned by Government utilities. Power developers can sell power only to Government utilities and are not permitted to sell directly to other customers.
Exchange rate and convertibility is ranked the third most critical risk in this category. Foreign companies in China are exposed to the exchange rate and convertibility risk for several years. China has gone through dif® cult times with its currency, switching from a twocurrency system to the RMB single-currency system in 1994 and coming through periods of dangerously low foreign exchange reserves. Its foreign reserves are now among the world’s highest. China is continuing foreign exchange reform and is doing much to allay foreign investors’ fear about currency conversion. It has pledged to make its currency convertible on the capital account by the year 2000 following the phasing-in of current account convertibility on 1 Dec. 1996. Be that as it may, the RMB is still only a partially convertible currency. There are corresponding risks related to the ease with which a foreign company in China can convert and repatriate RMB pro® ts into foreign currency and at a reasonable rate. In addition, although China was not affected by the recent Asian ® nancial turmoils it still has weaknesses in its ® nancial system and others. That is why the exchange rate and convertibility of RMB are regarded as a very critical risk.
As for ® nancial closing risk, it is also regarded as critical, though it ranks fourth in this category. In the face of Chinese BOT power project risks, project ® nancing can be dif® cult, with high costs of capital due to the high levels of perceived risk. The Chinese government is unwilling to provide ® nancial guarantees to private infrastructure developers, since one of the primary objectives in letting concessions in the ® rst place is to off-load its own ® nancial exposure. BOT developers in China are challenged to assure investors of guaranteed high rates of return in the face of inherent uncertainty. Thus, creative approaches to ® nancing and investment security are required to avoid extremely high costs of capital.
Effectiveness of mitigating measures
Exchange rate and convertibility risks
The options that presently are available to foreign companies in China wishing to convert RMB into foreign currency include: direct conversion through Chinese banks, currency swaps with other companies, balancing between projects, dual currency contracts, and special hedging measures for RMB. However, based on the overall responses from the survey, obtaining Government guarantees on exchange rate, and convertibility, e.g. ® xed rate, or to adjust tariff or extend concession to cover the cost, is the most effective measure for mitigating the exchange rate and convertibility risks. This measure is regarded as much more effective than the other two measures for its mean score (3.97) is much higher than the other two measures (2.94 and 2.50) as shown in Table 6.
The second effective measure is to use dual-currency contracts with certain portions of tariff to be paid in RMB and other transactions denominated in foreign currency. The above mentioned two measures have been adopted partially in Laibin B.
Table 6	Effectiveness of mitigating measures for exchange rate and convertibility risk
Effectiveness

Obtain Government’s guarantees of exchange rate and convertibility, e.g. ® xed rate or to adjust tariff or extend concession to cover the cost.
Use dual-currency contracts, with certain portions to be paid in RMB and other transactions denominated in foreign currency.
Hedging tools speci® cally tailored to China’s partially convertible currency by foreign banks are the third but less effective measures. Foreign banks are strictly limited in the scope of their transactions allowed within China using RMB; however, banks in Hong Kong and Singapore have come up with ways around these limitations to respond to demand by foreign companies in China for ways to protect against devaluation of the RMB. One example is the `nondelivery forward’ (NDF), a hedging instrument where no actual RMB cash is required for the transaction. Instead, the entire transaction is conducted in foreign currency (usually US dollars) outside of China, with the payout tied to the of® cial closing RMB rate posted each day by the SAEC. The NDF requires a contract rate and reference rate (the of® cial rate). The difference between the two rates then determines the gain or loss for each party in the transaction. Either way, transactions are automatically converted into foreign currency, so no RMB ever changes hands. Hence the non-delivery aspect of the forward (Macdonald, 1997).
Other measures suggested by respondents for this risk include: (a) linking tariff to exchange rate change; (b) using an experienced-in-China bank or ® nancial institution to arrange ® nancing; (c) obtaining SAEC guarantees plus foreign exchange adjustment formula in PPA with suf® cient support from a Government authority; and (d) obtaining an offshore branch of a Chinese bank to support foreign currency requirements.
The measures for mitigating this risk for the respondents’ ratings are all less than 3 (effective) as shown in Table 7. Nevertheless, equity ® nancing and cooperation with Government partners is still the most effective measure, for these can enable the project developer to limit risk. Equity ® nancing is critical to the success of BOT projects, and often in¯ uences the ability of a company to secure further debt ® nancing (Tiong, 1995b, c).
Cooperation with a Government partner in a JV relationship can help a foreign company to ® nance a BOT power project. Since it is guaranteed to own the asset after the concession JV period, the Government partner is often willing to take a reduction in its early dividend stream in return for greater dividends later. Such cooperation in revenue-sharing can assist the foreign company greatly with its equity returns and debt ® nancing.
Some alternatives to contract payment, especially the land development rights, are being considered by some foreign developers as an alternative method of deriving value from BOT projects, especially road projects; however, it is not so effective for a power project as usually power plants are located in backward or remote area. Though the measure is second, it cannot be considered as effective.
Initial public offerings (IPOs) of China-linked project companies are popular on the Hong Kong stock exchange and provide an excellent vehicle for raising equity project ® nance. It can be ideal for a foreign company to use IPO to cover the construction costs of a power plant when debt ® nancing is most dif® cult. After the plant is built and the high risk construction phase has been passed successfully, the company can access cheaper debt from the capital markets. The use of equity capital to ® nance construction not only protects the lenders from construction completion risk, but also it gives the developer a chance to verify that plant usage levels are real and bankable. However, it is regarded as a fairly effective measure as it is not easy for a non-Hong Kong-based foreign company to adopt. For a successful listing, a company should have a portfolio of projects already in operation to attract the equity investors.
Though the respondents did not suggest other more effective measures than those in Table 7, one practical approach as recommended by one respondent is that the BOT concessionaire should communicate well with the Government in seeking a realistic target date for ® nancial close. If the date were already speci® ed in the tender document, it should negotiate for a longer ® nancial closing period. This was what the concessionaire for the Laibin B project actually did. In Laibin B’s tender document, the original schedule for ® nancial closing was 60 days. This was extended to 180 days in the ® nal concession agreement after the concessionaire negotiated with the government. Nevertheless, the ® nancing of the project was actually closed 270 days after the concession award, a delay of three months from the of® cial schedule.
Dispatch constraint risk
The most effective measure for this risk is to enter into a take-or-pay contract in the PPA with the power purchaser (usually local government agency or enterprise), as shown in Table 8. A take-or-pay contract is an agreement by the power agency to pay
Table 7	Effectiveness of mitigating measures for ® nancial closing risk
Effectiveness

Equity ® nancing and cooperation with Government partners.
Adopt alternatives to contract payment, e.g. land development rights.
Use initial public offerings on stock to raise funds especially equity ® nance.
speci® ed tariff payments periodically for the electricity purchased, and it must make speci® ed minimum payments even if it does not take delivery. This agreement guarantees the producer that ® xed costs such as debt-service payments, ® xed operation and maintenance costs and return on equity will be covered. Variable costs such as fuel costs will be paid only if power is actually purchased. Entering into dispatch contracts with Government authorities to dispatch a power plant at full capacity for a minimum (guaranteed) number of hours each year is the second most effective measure, while obtaining Government’s guarantee that the transmission line will be ready in time for dispatch is also an effective measure. All these measures are incorporated in the Laibin B project. The Guangxi Government guarantees to purchase the minimum net electrical output of 3500 million kWh each operating year in a take-or-pay PPA manner and provide all transmission lines in time.
Other measures suggested by respondents for this risk include: 1. ensuring capacity objectives are met during the concession period; 2. treating dispatch constraint as force majeure risk; 3. understanding clearly the dispatch regulations and how these relate to obligations.
The most effective measure for mitigating tariff adjustment risk is to have a formula for the adjustment that can make possible objective calculations of tariffs each year. The second effective measure is to separate and rede® ne a tariff, e.g. portions of a tariff ® xed while portions adjusted, or portions to be paid in foreign currency. The third measure, i.e. maintaining good relationship with the Government and a positive public image of the project, is regarded as fairly effective (Table 9).
The only other measure suggested by respondents for mitigating this risk is to obtain the Government’s guarantee to adjust the tariff when certain unfavourable conditions, such as interest or exchange rates or fuel price exceeding certain thresholds, occur.
Other risks in this category as suggested by respondents, and their mitigating measures, are shown in Table 10.
China has introduced new policies in awarding BOT contracts since the end of 1996 when the concession of the ® rst state-approved BOT project, the Laibin B was awarded. The BOT model will be an essential part of the ® nancing necessary for the massive investment in infrastructure. It is likely that the government will adopt a gradual approach to the introduction of BOT, choosing carefully the pilot batch of projects. The choice will re¯ ect a desire to introduce appropriate technology and to bring investment to the provinces of China that most need it, subject to that province being able to support the undertakings necessay for project ® nancing. Nevertheless, international investors cannot afford to ignore the scale of the infrastructure market in China. Their keenness to invest in this market, combined with the Government’s determination to attract the necessary funding, will ensure that ways are found to make BOT work. However, China’s unique culture and social systems make the tendering system, the administrative procedures and regulations in China different from those of western countries. Only those foreign contractors who have fully understood the system can survive and succeed in tendering for construction contracts and BOT projects in China. In this research, the unique or critical risks associated with China’s BOT projects are investigated.
Table 8	Effectiveness of mitigating measures for dispatch constraint risk
Effectiveness

Enter into take-or-pay PPA with power purchaser (Government).
Enter into dispatch contracts with Government authorities to dispatch power plant at full capacity for a minimum number of hours each year.
Obtain Government’s guarantee that transmission line will be ready in time for dispatch.
Table 9	Effectiveness of mitigating measures for tariff adjustment risk
Effectiveness

Have a formula for tariff adjustment that can enable objective calculation of tariffs each year.
Maintain good relationship with Government and a positive public image of the project.
Separate and rede® ne tariff, e.g. portions of tariff ® xed while portions adjusted, or portions to be paid in foreign currency.
Table 10	Other exchange and revenue risks and their mitigating measures
Criticality
Enter into a ® xed rate loan
with Bank of China.
and tap into overseas

Effectiveness score:
Effectiveness score:
Effectiveness score:
more than 100% ® nancing
where contractors
commitments to assure
nancing will be there
when needed.
Effectiveness score:
Effectiveness score:
Effectiveness score:
speci® cally presented the ® ndings on the criticality of the foreign exchange and revenue risks. The main conclusions are as follows.
The identi® ed unique or critical risks in their criticality sequence are: tariff adjustment; dispatch constraint; exchange rate and convertibility; and ® nancial closing. The ® rst three factors were viewed as very critical by international professionals. The fourth factor, of ® nancial closing, was viewed as critical by the ® nancial professionals and very critical by the other respondents.
The measures for mitigating each of these risks have been evaluated by respondents. Most of the measures are regarded as effective or very effective and only a few of them are regarded as fairly effective. Investors and lenders should ensure that three key measures are incorporated in the concession agreement as they are considered to be very effective in mitigating the risks of tariff adjustment, dispatch constraint and exchange rate and convertibility. These measures are: (a) have a formula for tariff adjustment that would make possible objective calculations of tariffs each year; (b) enter into take-or-pay power purchase agreement with the power purchaser; and (c) obtain Government guarantees of exchange rate and convertibility such as agreement on ® xed exchange rate, adjusting tariffs if RMB depreciates, or extending the concession period to cover any additional costs for foreign exchanges. For ® nancial closing, the practical approach is to communicate well with the Government and to negotiate for a longer ® nancial closing period so that there is suf® cient time to raise the project funds successfully.
The authors are grateful to all respondents of the survey for their valuable opinions and contributions. The authors are also grateful to Mr Lang Sai Qiang, Director, Bridge of Trust, Beijing, China;
Director, Department of Foreign Capital Utilization, SPC, China; Mr Zhang Yi, Chief, Division of Engineering Construction, Construction Industry Department, Ministry of Construction, China, for giving interviews and providing related information.
