Practices Are Slowly Changing
Many design and construction companies are looking to add long-term strategic planning concepts to their traditional arsenal of short-term project planning tools. A study developed by the author at the School of Civil and Environmental Engineering at Georgia Tech in conjunction with AECStrategies, LLC, a management consulting firm, showed that the industry is struggling with the need to move from a project-based business that emphasizes the success of projects as the key to long-term success to a strategic business that emphasizes the customer and the enterprise as the key. The trend is toward building a business that is selective in its customers, innovative in its marketing plans, hungry for new markets, eager for diversity in the talents in its workforce, and ready to formulate a plan for long-term success. Charts illustrate how small and large companies are approaching such topics as core competencies, knowledge resources, lifelong learning, financial management, and competitive advantage analyses.
re construction companies destined to .....	and strategic management. Although the refrain of “budget
ride the waves of the economy like a .....	andschedule”isstillthekingoftheconstructionvocabulary,
boat without an engine, growing in .....	terms such as “strategy,” “planning,” “competitive advan-
large bursts when the economy grows .....	tage,” and “market analysis” are breaking through the
anddecliningorfailingwhentheecon- .....	project-oriented halls of the construction office. Is this a sign
omy contracts? Are construction com- .....	of change in the industry to a greater focus on management
paniesgoingtofindthemotorthatprovidesthemomentum .....	issues? To put it differently, is this a signal that construction
to drive through these waves and control their own future? ....	companies are looking to add long-term strategic planning
Withover10,000failuresayearintheconstructionindustry, .
. itwouldseemthatthepictureofaboatwithoutamotorbest .
. describes the businesses in this industry. However, some .
. industry executives are beginning to challenge this assump- .
The sounds of change are beginning to be heard from .
. theofficesofcontractorsanddesignfirmsaroundthecountry. .
Thesearenotthesoundsofcomputersandhigh-techdevices .
. designed to make the industry the next convert of the .
. dot.com age. Rather, these sounds are the words of business .
concepts to their traditional arsenal of short-term project planning tools?
The answer to these questions is a definite maybe. In the recently released AEC Strategic Management Practices Report, developed by the author in the School of Civil and Environmental Engineering at Georgia Tech in conjunction with AECStrategies, LLC, a management consulting firm, these questions were studied to determine the state of strategic management practices in the construction industry.
results of the study illustrate how some in the industry are activelylookingforawaytocontroltheirfutures,whileothershaveacceptedtheirridethroughtheeconomicwavesand are philosophic about a possible crash at the bottom of a future fall.
Aswithmostthingsintheconstructionindustry,companies are taking a conservative, cautious approach to this changeintheirmanagementpractices.Althoughcautionhas always been a trademark of the industry, the economy at the beginning of this decade is challenging this approach. Such factors as globalization, technology, integrated economies, and a changing workforce are leaving construction companies with a simple choice: innovate and adopt long-term planningconceptsorceasetobeanindustryleader.Asstated byClintMays,thevicepresidentofJ.A.JonesConstruction, “Withthechangingdynamicsofthemarketplace,including the Internet, multitiered ownership, and new competitors who are forcing margins down in traditional profit areas, a company that does not focus on strategic issues will find its doorsclosedinaveryshorttime.”Althoughthissoundslike a harsh judgment, the 21st century business environment movesatapacethatleaveslittleroomforhesitation.Asdemonstratedbytheincreasingnumberofcorporatemergersand takeovers,today’sindustryleadercanbetomorrow’sindustry casualty withlittle more than a press release and achange in business cards.
THE STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT STUDY
Focusing on the single question of whether AEC companies are adopting strategic management practices, the study providesasnapshotofthestrategicthinkingwithintheindustry asitenterstheglobalageofthe21stcentury.Developedover a two-year period, the study represents the practices of more than 500 companies from every sector, geographic region, and revenue category in the industry (including over a third
Fortune 500 benchmark established in the study. As a benchmark, the Fortune 500 has set a significant bar for the construction industry to hurdle. Examples of this high level includetheareasoflong-termplanning,where74percentof the Fortune 500 firms have established vision statements; market evaluation, where 93 percent of the companies activelyevaluatecompetitorsandfocusonestablishinglongtermcompetitiveadvantages; andplanningfornewmarkets, where 98 percent of the companies have implemented plans for formally evaluating and entering new markets. In contrast, design and construction organizations are actively engaged in these activities at a rate that is 30 to 40 percent less than the Fortune 500 organizations (see figure 1).
While it is true that the Fortune 500 companies haveset a high benchmark, numbers by themselves do not provide a picturethatwillmotivatetheconstructionindustrytoactor modify their practices. Rather, to convey this message, a graphicalsetofstrategicmanagementprofileswasdeveloped for this unique study. As pictured in the Fortune 500 profile in figure 2, the profiles capture three elements: the strategic managementfactors,thelevelofstrategicmanagementintegration as evaluated by the companies, and the average implementation achieved for each strategic management factor.
To interpret the profile, the reader should focus on whether or not individual boxes in the profile are solid or blank. Ideally, an industry profile would consist of all solid boxes in either column 6 or 7. This profile would indicate that an organization is fully implementing or measuring every strategic management factor. Although the Fortune 500 profile does not quite reach the ideal condition, it fulfils the two most important criteria. First, the profiles indicate thatallcompaniesbelievetheyhaveatleastdevelopedformal
Thedatacompiledfromthestrategicmanagementstudytell a story of an industry in transition, but with a long journey lefttotraveltoachievethelong-termplanningresultsofthe
Percentage of Fortune 500, Top 400 ENR Construction Companies, and Small Construction Companies Focusing on the Implementation of Strategic Management Factors
of the top 400 construction companies and top 500 design .
. . firms named by Engineering News-Record). Representing the .
. . thoughts of executives from million- to billion-dollar com- .
. . panies, the study illustrates how one industry is struggling .
. . with the need to move from a project-based business that .
. . emphasizes the success of projects as the key to long-term .
. . success to a strategic business that emphasizes the customer .
. . and the enterprise as the key to long-term success.
. . words, the trend is toward building a business that is selec- .
. . gry for new markets, eager for diversity in the talents in its .
. . workforce, and ready to formulate a plan for long-term .
Strategic Management Profile for the Benchmark Fortune 500, Characterized By a Narrow, Mostly
strategic plans, resulting in a profile that is graphically nar- .
. . row in width. Second, the profile boxes are almost com- .
. . pletely filled in, the exception being the lifelong learning .
As an aside, even the values in these boxes narrowly .
. . missed the implementation threshold. .
As seen in the profile of the top 400 contractors in figure 3, .
. . the top construction companies have some ground to make .
. . up toachievethe resultsof thenation’slargest organizations. .
Theprofilehighlightsthevariabilityinfocusareaswithinthe .
. . industry. First, the profile is graphically very wide, with val- .
. . uesineverycolumnexceptthefirst.Thisindicatesthatcom- .
. . from awareness of the concept to full measurement.
. . mity within the group is minimal, as organizations are all .
. . over the implementation spectrum. Second, the profile indi- .
. . catesveryselectiveattentionareasbytheindustry.Although .
. . knowledgeresources,finance,andmarketsreceivesignificant .
. . attention, the areas of core competencies, lifelong learning, .
. . and competition receive equally little attention. Is this a .
. . reflection of the industry’s traditional emphasis on financial .
. . management of projects, or is it a reflection of the need for .
. . greater attention to changing market conditions?
In comparison with the top 400 contractors named by .
ENR, figure 4 illustrates the strategic management profile forthesmallerconstructionorganizations(under$10million revenue).Althoughmanyobservationscanbemadeconcerning this profile, probably the best statement is that these organizations need to place some emphasis on obtaining a motor for their trips through the economic waves. As illustrated by the width of the profile, the organizations in this category assess their strategic management efforts at every pointontheintegrationscale.However,ofgreaterconcernis the lack of solid boxes in the profile. With no single area of strength,thesmallcontractorsaresettingthemselvesupfora difficult transition to the new business environment. With little attention to the long-term focus of strategic planning, these organizations are facing a reality of either living on project-to-projectbasisorpossiblyclosingtheirdoorsaspart of industry consolidation.
The final profile of interest here is the profile of the top 500 design firms as defined by ENR. Do design firms have better management practices than construction companies? Do the traditional project management skills of the construction company provide an advantage over the design emphasis of engineering and architectural firms? Based on thecurrentstudy,theanswertothesequestionsisnoonboth accounts. The design firm profile is similarly wide and similarly variable when compared with the largest construction
Strategic Management Profile for the Top 400 Construction Companies, Characterized by a Wide,
Variably Focused Profile
However, differences do exist in the focus areas. The design firms place greater emphasis on core competencies and competition and less on finance. However, as an overallprofile,neithergroupisthreateningtoraisethestrategic management bar set by the Fortune 500 organizations.
Hundreds of companies have been studied and their responses compiled into numeric and graphical representations. What is the message that should be taken away by a construction industry executive? In short, it comprises balanceandaggressiveness.Abroadspectrumofstrategicissues must be addressed by today’s organization if it intends to be prepared for waves that come from every direction. Internal issues such as establishing a vision and preparing the workforce for change are essential for building a solid company foundationorpoweringthemotor.Aswithabuilding,even if those outside the organization admire the facade, the lack of a good foundation will ultimately result in failure. For an organization, this foundation has three critical components: vision, infrastructure, and preparation. The vision provides theroadmapanddirectionsfortheorganization’sjourneyin the business environment. The infrastructure, including both personnel and technology, provides the resources required to complete the journey. And finally, the preparation provided by an educated workforce provides the stability and continuity required to undertake an extended
. journey by ensuring that employees are prepared to lead the
Such external issues as new markets and competitive
. advantageprovidetheopportunityfororganizationstodrive
. utive.Asstatedinthereport,manyexecutivesarehesitantto
. examine the markets in which the organization is operating
. or to carefully assess the competitive advantage that their
. own organization has established over its competitors.
. doesthishesitationexist? Theanswerisareluctancebyorga-
. nizationstofacetherealitythattheirmarketsandcustomers
. may have changed or moved in another direction.
. tion finds that it has to change to meet the needs of the new
. economy.Unfortunately,thispositionoftenleadstoastateof
. affairs where the organization has no warning or protection
. against a change in the waves. The cost is a very tough fall
. intothebottomofthewaveorintothestatisticscompiledon
. failed businesses.
Finally, the issue of aggressiveness provides a fitting con-
. clusion to this article. Undertaking the moves required to
. achieve strategic management progress may be painful for
. some organizations, but this discomfort should be tempered
. by the thought that the organization is setting in place an
. aggressive road map for the future. As stated by Clint Mays,
. “Strategy will provide the differentiator between companies
Strategic Management Profile for the Small Construction Companies, Characterized by a Wide,
Mostly Empty Profile
that are viewed by owners as commodities and those that .
. emerge as profitable industry leaders.” .
ORGANIZATIONAL INSIGHTS	.
If your organization is having difficulty determining where .
. tices,yourorganizationisingoodcompany.Althoughmany .
. of the more than 500 companies analyzed in the strategic .
. management study have started down the road of strategic .
. management, the number that have reached the implemen- .
. tation or measurement stage remains limited at best.
. more common is the stage where companies want to start .
. the strategic management process but fail to pinpoint the .
. strategic areas that require the greatest attention. Like a per- .
. sonenteringanewcitywithoutamap,theorganizationthat .
. begins the strategic management process without a particu- .
. lardirectionisboundtoendupexpendingsignificantenergy .
. before finally realizing that it is hopelessly lost. .
Providing AEC organizations with this direction is the .
. . focus of the on-line benchmarking system developed by .
AECStrategies, LLC. Based on the data collected in the stra- .
. tegic management study, the on-line benchmark incorpo- .
. rates the questions and data used in the original study. .
Through the Web site, organizations can fill out an on-line .
. questionnaire at  that will instantly pro- .
. vide an evaluation of their strategic management practices. .
With options to generate benchmarks against an industry sector, the entire AEC industry, regional competition, revenue category competition, or the Fortune 500, the on-line benchmarking system provides organizations with on-line feedback regarding their strategic management strengths and weaknesses.
Based on a 1: 100 scale, the benchmark provides overall, internal, and external benchmarks against the selected groups. Additionally, a percentile rating provides organizationswithaninsightintowheretheystandversustheircompetition.Thisisimportantbecausewhileabenchmarkscore of 75 may seem like a good rating for an organization, if the competition is scoring in the 80s or above, the 75 no longer appears to be so strong. Of greater importance, these numbers provide a strong indicator to executives showing where theyneedtoplaceimmediateresourcestostrengthenparticularstrategicweaknesses.Thebenchmarkprovidesastarting road map to strategic management implementation.
Although this focus on strategic management benchmarking is in its early stage, it is foreseeable that on-line benchmarking will become another dimension in the prequalification process or in the selection of subcontractors. For public-sector and private-sector owners alike, the strategic management benchmark will provide insights into the managementpracticesoftheorganizationstheypartnerwith to complete projects. Based on these insights, it is plausible to foresee an industry where organizations that are prepared
for long-term success will develop strategic advantages over their tradition-bound, project-focused competition.
Can an organization with century-old roots and traditions as a general contractor transform itself into a modern, strategically focused organization? Can this organization focus a groupofnationaloperatingdivisionsonasinglevisionstatement and set of goals? These are the questions that many individuals asked when J.A. Jones Construction embarked on a focused effort to establish strategic goals and transform itself into a strategically managed organization. A national construction company founded in the late 1800s in Charlotte, North Carolina, J.A. Jones has grown into a national organization with annual revenues exceeding $1.3 billion. However, like many construction companies, J.A. Jones facedtheproblemoftransformingitselffromacompanythat emphasized project management into one that emphasizes markets and customers.
AssummarizedbyBobHambright,thepresidentofJ.A. Jones Construction, the key to success for today’s constructioncompanyistolearnfromotherindustries,focusonstrategic resources, and build better management processes. Reflecting on the industry, he says, “We must stop taking risksthatwedonotcontrolorcannotprice.Ifwearesuccessful at changing the way the construction community does business, then we will be providing our customers with
. greater value and we can then insist on improved margins.”
Given this as a guiding statement, Jones faced the prob-
. lem of changing the idea of success into tangible reality.
. achieve this reality, Jones turned to strategic planning and
. management practices. Incorporating leading-edge concepts
. suchasbalancedscorecardimplementation,strategicmarket
. evaluation, customer analysis, and strategic finance analysis,
. the Jones organization focused its national employee base on
. a single set of vision statements. Through a yearlong effort,
. this strategic focus is starting to show tangible results.
An organization that was traditionally geographic in
. focus and independent in the regions has transformed itself
. intoanorganizationthatfocusesitseffortsonemergingmar-
. kets and national centers of excellence that reflect strategic
. andcompetitiveadvantages.Withafocusonincreasedprof-
. itabilityandenhancedoperatingprocedures,Joneshassetits
. sights on building sustainable competitive advantages and
. differentiators over the next 100 years of operations.
. transformationissummarizedbyClintMays,thecompany’s
. vicepresident: “Ourcustomersarelookingforstrategicpart-
therefore we must demonstrate our commitment to
. focusing on strategic issues as the basis for mutual success.”
PaulS.Chinowsky,Ph.D.,isanassociateprofessorofcivil
. and environmental engineering at the Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta.
Leadership Manage. Eng., 2001, 1(2):
Leadership Manage. Eng., 2001, 1(2):
