Predicting the level of organizational effectiveness:
a methodology for the construction firm
To cite this article: Vir Handa & Adnan Adas (1996) Predicting the level of organizational effectiveness: a methodology for the construction firm, Construction Management & Economics, 14: 4, 341-352, DOI: 10.1080/014461996373412
To link to this article:
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
Construction Management and Economics (1996) 14, 341± 352
Predicting the level of organizational effectiveness:
a methodology for the construction ® rm
VIR HANDA and ADNAN ADAS
Civil Engineering Department, University of Waterloo, Waterloo N2L 3G1, Ontario, Canada
Received 26 June 1995; accepted 10 October 1995
Researchers have offered a variety of models for examining organizational effectiveness, yet there is little consensus as to what constitutes a valid set of criteria for measurement. In today’s environment it is vital for construction ® rms aiming to maintain and improve performance to utilize an appropriate method to predict their organizational effectiveness. This paper illustrates a methodology for predicting the level of organizational effectiveness in the construction ® rm. The competing values approach towards understanding organizational effectiveness and its assessment is used to identify 14 variables. These variables are conceptualized from four general categories of organizational characteristics, relevant for examining effectiveness: structural context, organizational ¯ exibility, rules and regulations, person-oriented processes and strategic means and ends. The methodology hypothesizes a multivariate linear model of the 14 variables as predictors and effectiveness operationalized by the level of overall performance as the response variable. Cross-sectional data were collected from 76 ® rms operating in institutional and commercial (IC) construction. The validated model shows that ® ve of the hypothesized 14 variables are highly signi® cant in predicting the level of organizational effectiveness in the construction ® rms studied: organizational attitude towards change, multiple project handling ability, level of planning by management, strength of organizational culture and level of workers’ participation in decision
prediction, organizational effectiveness, construction ®
Introduction
The measurement of organizational effectiveness is a very important step in the improvement process of any organization. Its importance in creating and designing effective organizations is discussed by Hitt (1988). Yet, Steers (1975) and Zammuto (1982) described the measurement of effectiveness as one of the most problematic issues in the ® eld of organization theory. Researchers have offered a variety of models for examining effectiveness, yet there is little consensus as to what constitutes a valid set of effectiveness criteria (Cameron and Whetten, 1983; Lewin and Minton, 1986). According to Das (1990) the de® nition and, consequently, the criteria and approaches employed in evaluating effectiveness are various and, in some instances, paradoxical as shown by the variability of de® nitions. Georgopoulos (1957) referred to it as the extent to which an organization as a social system ful® ls its objectives without incapacitating its means and resources and without placing a strain upon its members. Yuchtman and
Seashore (1967) de® ned it as the ability of the organization, in absolute or relative terms, to exploit its environment in the acquisition of scarce and valued resources. Price (1972) described it as the degree of achievement of multiple goals and Hannan and Freeman (1977) as the degree of congruence between organizational goals and observable outcomes. Pennings and Goodman (1977) suggested that organizations perform effectively if the relevant constraints imposed by the constituency of the organization can be satis® ed and if the results meet or exceed a set of criteria for the constituency multiple goals. Miner (1988) de® ned effective organizations as those that receive inputs, transform them into outputs, export them to environments, monitor changes in the environments and take corrective actions to ensure their survival.
Although there is some degree of overlap, it is apparent that a variety of approaches exist as to what constitutes organizational effectiveness. Many variables are being used as indicators and predictors. Campbell (1976) found over 25 types of variables that fall into three general classes: economic and technical such as pro® ts, growth, productivity and quality of products and services, social such as workers’ turnover, involvement and morale and organizational characteristics such as the level of ¯ exibility and control.
Approaches to effectiveness
In the literature, most models and approaches that are used to understand organizational effectiveness can be classi® ed into three general classes. First are the qualities of organizational approaches. These attempt to relate effectiveness to certain organizational characteristics such as the degree of formalization, openness of communication, level of control and other qualities related to structure, culture and strategy.
Second are the goal-setting approaches. Models that fall into this category use the degree of achievement of a certain output goal or goals as an indicator of organizational effectiveness. Third are the systems approaches. Included here are models that emphasize the organization as a system and attempt to assess the effectiveness of the system in terms of its input, transformation and output. Models that fall into this category include the resource model which views effectiveness as the ability of the organization as a system to exploit its environments, the internal process model where effectiveness is judged by the ef® ciency of the process inside the system, the strategic adaptation model which recognizes and judges effectiveness by the degree of adaptability to external forces and the open system model which views the organization as an open system. Effectiveness here is indicated by the ability to meet internal and external challenges.
Another perspective, the multiple constituencies approach, proposes that an effective organization is one that satis® es the demand of those constituencies in its environment from whom it requires support for its continued existence.
There are other approaches that utilize a con® gurational view of organizational strategy, structure and dominant values to analyse effectiveness. These approaches de® ne ideal types or con® gurations that organizations tend to pursue based on their structure, strategy and dominant values. Effectiveness is determined by how close the characteristics of the organization are to that of a con® guration. Included here are Miles and Snow’s (1978) typology that identi® ed four ideal types based on strategy: the prospector, the analyser, the defender and the reactor. Mintzberg’s (1979) typology identi® ed ® ve ideal types based on structure: simple structure, machine bureaucracy, professional bureaucracy, divisionalized form and ad hocracy. Quinn and Rohrbaugh’s (1983) competing values approach identi® ed four ideal types of organizations based on dominant values of structural context, focus and strategic means and ends.
The need for better measurement
Gameson (1992) found that one in ® ve commercial construction clients were dissatis® ed with the service they received. One of the reasons that leads to such a low performance is the use of inappropriate measures to assess effectiveness. Improper assessment by organizations leads to inaccurate conclusions which in turn result in a substandard performance. Although most managers use some indicators (mostly ® nancial) these do not capture all of the salient elements of effectiveness and cannot be relied upon as predictors of effectiveness. Measures used by the management of construction ® rms are rarely justi® ed or linked to the approaches discussed above. The development of better methods to measure effectiveness should be a high priority in order to achieve and maintain improved performance.
A number of researchers have noted that, when developing effectiveness measurement, it is important to specify whether it is the variables that predict effectiveness or the variables that indicate effectiveness that are of interest (Cameron, 1986). Here the focus is on developing a method to predict effectiveness.

To have a comprehensive understanding of organizational effectiveness, the key variables in the domain of effectiveness must be identi® ed and then the relationship of these variables to effectiveness must be determined. Such an approach would provide a reliable method of predicting the level of effectiveness. The types of variables or criteria that can be used vary by domain and level of analysis. Cameron and Whetten (1983) and Cameron (1986) suggested that in order to develop accurate measurement at the organizational level, variables/measures must be combined into an overall model that indicates performance in the multiple domains of effectiveness. He added that, although organizations could operate in multiple domains, they may perform well only in a limited number. Tsui (1990) argued that this multidimensional view of performance implies that different patterns of relationships between organizational performance and its determinants will emerge. Miller and Friesen (1984), in their study of organizational effectiveness and its analysis, suggested that researchers should attempt to use an approach based on recurring patterns of attributes or con® gurations of attributes that relate effectiveness empirically. According to Meyer et al. (1993) using con® gurational approaches in organizational analysis represents a holistic stance. Rather than trying to explain how order is designed into the parts of an organization, con® gurational inquiry tries to explain how order emerges from the interactions of these parts as a whole. Organizational assessment according to con® gurations can be justi® ed on the grounds of attempting to understand commonalities across a homogenous group of organizations.
Dotty et al. (1993) suggested three main steps in order to develop valid quantitative models based on con® gurational inquiry. First, organizational con® gurations in an identi® ed approach must be conceptualized and modelled as ideal types where effectiveness is highest. This is necessary because the ® t among the contextual, structural and strategic factors is at a maximum in these con® gurations. Second, organizational characteristics which represent the different effectiveness domains in the ideal types must be integrated into an overall multivariate pro® le or model. Then the level of these characteristics must be determined against a valid measure of effectiveness. Third, based on an assessment of the level of these characteristics in the organization under study, the overall model can then be used to predict the effectiveness of the organization.
After a careful review of all the models and approaches used by organizational researchers in the analysis and assessment of organizational effectiveness, the competing values were chosen as a valid con® gurational approach on which to identify criteria of effectiveness for the developed method. The reasons are 2-fold. First, its con® gurations, as will be explained later, represent the integration of most of the effectiveness criteria already used by researchers and managers. Second, it has already been validated for construction organizations by Maloney and Federle (1993). A detailed discussion of the approach and a related methodology follows.
The competing values approach
The competing values approach was ® rst proposed by Quinn and Rohrbaugh (1983). The approach has also been discussed by Lewin and Minton (1986), Cameron (1986), Quinn (1988), Robbins (1990) and Maloney and Federle (1991) and is based on the premise that there is no one best criterion for evaluating effectiveness. It organizes, consolidates and integrates multiple criteria in the domains of effectiveness into three sets of incompatible dimensions. These are ¯ exibility versus control, internal versus external focus and means versus ends. The ® rst set contrasts two dimensions of an organization’s structure: ¯ exibility values innovations, adaptation and change, while control favours stability, order and predictability. The second set deals with whether focus and emphasis should be placed internally on the well-being and development of the people in the organization or externally on the well-being of the organization itself. The third set relates to organizational means versus ends, the former stressing internal processes and the long-term and the latter emphasizing ® nal outcomes and the short-term.
These three sets are depicted in the four organizational models or con® gurations shown in Figure 1. The models are the open system model, the human relations model, the rational goal model and the internal process model. In the ® gure, there are axes of contrasting values that de® ne the four models. Each model represents a particular set of values/criteria of effectiveness and has a polar opposite with contrasting emphasis. The vertical axis pertains to organization structure context and it contrasts stability and control with ¯ exibility. The horizontal axis pertains to focus indicating whether dominant values are internal or external to the organization. The two inner axes pertain to organizational means and ends for each model and they contrast the processes or means (e.g. goal-setting) with organizational outcomes and the outcomes or ends (e.g. productivity) themselves.
In brief, each model has characteristics which differ from the other and which in¯ uence the level of effectiveness in the organization differently. The rational goal model emphasizes control and organizational focus as dominant effectiveness values; planning and goal setting are means and productivity and ef® ciency are ends. The open system model emphasizes ¯ exibility and an organizational focus as dominant effectiveness values; readiness and ¯ exibility are means, while growth and external support are ends. Dominant effectiveness values for the internal process model are control and internal focus, stressing communication processes as means and control as ends. The human relations model emphasizes ¯ exibility and internal focus, with cohesion and morale as means and skilled workers as ends.
Organizations tend to pursue the values of more than one model at the same time. This is represented by the
Figure 1 Competing values con® gurations and criteria of organizational effectiveness
hybridization of values between the four models. When the values pursued by an organization are paradoxical or con¯ ict, this would result in certain trade-offs between levels of these values based on the speci® c environmental situation faced by the organization. For example, stressing a moderate level of competitiveness and external focus by an organization does not exclude it from placing some emphasis on the development of its workers and adopting strategies to enhance morale and cohesion among them. From this perspective, viewing effectiveness as the result of hybridization of certain levels of values in the four models represents a more realistic view of the nature of the organization and how it organizes itself to achieve effectiveness.
Maloney and Federle (1993) developed an assessment methodology based on the application of the competing values approach to organizational culture in engineering and construction organizations. The backbone of the methodology is classi® cation of the organization according to culture types. Ratings of the organization by management and workers are analysed and compared with each other. Particular attention is placed upon the comparison of the ratings of the manager and that of the subordinates. The potential for organizational ineffectiveness is indicated by the degree of gap between perceptions of the organization across culture types of the four models.
Kotter and Heskett (1992) studied the relationship between strength of culture and organizational effectiveness. Although they have found relationships between strong culture and performance, in some instances, organizations that were rated with weak cultures performed just as well or better than organizations with stronger cultures. Kotter and Heskett (1992) attributed these irregularities to the effects of organizational characteristics not included in the assessment.
By delineating variables from the four models of competing values, Ostroff and Schmitt (1993) studied con® gurations of organizational effectiveness and ef® ciency. Their ® ndings indicate that effective and ef® cient organizations are in¯ uenced not only by strength of culture, but also by other variables such as participation in decision making, goal emphasis, attitude towards change and level of structural contextual emphasis.
A multivariate model was developed to relate a number of organizational characteristics of the construction ® rm identi® ed along the domains of effectiveness in the four con® gurations of the competing values approach to a construct of organizational effectiveness. This was done in three main steps (Adas, 1995). First, the organizational characteristics’ categories and variables relevant for examining the effectiveness of the construction ® rm were identi® ed. Second, a ® eld study was designed and carried out. In the study, identi® ed variables were operationalized, scales of measurement were constructed and their reliability tested and cross-sectional data were collected from a sample of construction ® rms using self-administered questionnaires that targeted management and workers. Third, statistical analyses were used to determine and validate a multivariate linear model. The model relates organizational effectiveness, operationalized by a measure of the level of overall performance and the variables that were deemed signi® cant by the analysis.
Identi® cation of variables
Analysis of a construction ® rm’s characteristics that pertain to structural context, focus and strategy (means and ends) along the dimensions of effectiveness as represented by values of the four models, helped to identify the important variables included in the methodology. A construction ® rm that pursues strategic ¯ exibility must have a structure that is better suited for contractual arrangements that provide ¯ exibility such as subcontracting, joint venturing, partnering and alliances. Although pursuing these contractual arrangements may provide cost-effectiveness, they limit the degree of control the organization has over its processes. In its quest for the ¯ exibility of services offered, a construction ® rm may integrate vertically upward by offering ® nancing and Architectural/Engineering (A/E) design and material supply services or downward by offering maintenance services in an effort to exercise a greater degree of control over the quality of the construction product and increase its market share. However according to Krippaehne et al. (1992), a construction organization with integrated services will develop defensive strategies and rigidity to compensate for increases in risks and potential increases in ® xed costs.
The construction ® rm’s style of management of its workers, its criteria of success and the type and strength of culture that exists in the ® rm in¯ uence its organizational focus. Internally focused construction ® rms that value ¯ exibility in the assessment of effectiveness should be more sensitive to their workers. They may achieve this by allowing a higher degree of participation in decision making through a strong culture of team-work. Internally focused construction ® rms that value control in the assessment of effectiveness, should stress adequate communication and information management through a strong culture of hierarchy with clear rules and regulations for performance.
Externally focused construction ® rms which value ¯ exibility in the assessment of effectiveness, should emphasize adaptability through a strong culture that promotes readiness and innovations. Externally focused ® rms which value control in the assessment of effectiveness should emphasize planning, goal setting and a strong culture that promotes productivity and accomplishment.
The analysis of organizational characteristics of the construction ® rm along the domain of effectiveness, as identi® ed by the four models in the competing values approach, aided in identifying 14 variables that are deemed related to the organizational effectiveness of the construction ® rm. These variables can be grouped into four general categories: structural context, ¯ exibility, rules and regulation, strategic means and goals and person-oriented processes (Table 1).
In the category of structural context, the study hypothesizes six variables which can be used to indicate the effectiveness of the structural component of the construction ® rm in dealing with its external and internal environment. This category includes the following variables.
The level of integration in services offered by the construction ® rm which re¯ ects the structural complexity of the organization in its attempt to control the quality and range of its construction product.
The level of subcontracting used in the majority of construction projects which Eccles (1981a) has shown to in¯ uence the complexity of structure in the construction ® rm and re¯ ects the ® rm’s attitude towards risk sharing and enhancing its cost-effectiveness.
Level of integration of services
Flexibility/control
Level of subcontracting
Level of multiple project handling
Level of coordination
Level of information ¯ ow
Flexibility, rules and regulations
Attitude towards change
Level of adherence to rules Level of process control
Person-oriented processes
Strength of culture
Level of workers’ participation in decision making
Strategic means and goals
Table 1	Variables used for measuring effectiveness
The level of multiproject handling which re¯ ects the ability of the construction ® rm’s structure to handle simultaneous work at different locations to increase its volume of business and, hence, its pro® ts (Eccles, 1981b).
The level of partnering, joint venturing and strategic alliances which re¯ ects how successful the organization’s structure is in accommodating the added structural complexity resulting from such relationships. Typically construction ® rms enter into such relationships to access technology, share risks, secure ® nancing, enter new markets, improve their competitive position and meet project requirements (Badger and Mulligan, 1995).
The level of organizational coordination which re¯ ects the effectiveness of the structure in coordinating its internal and external relationship.
The level of information ¯ ow which indicates the degree of openness and quality of communication in the organizational structure.
In the second category of ¯ exibility, rules and regulations, the study hypothesizes four variables that in¯ uence how effective the organizational structure is in mediating between the ¯ exibility-control points of the ¯ exibility dimension. These include the following.
Extent of using regulations in work procedures, instruction and evaluation.
Level of adherence to rules and regulation by management and workers of the construction ® rm.
Level of control the ® rm attempts to exert over its processes.
Firm’s attitude towards change.
All these variables together underlie and re¯ ect the effort of the ® rm to mediate between its ¯ exibility and the control it should exercise over its processes in order to achieve effectiveness.
The third category of variables is based on the dimension of focus which represents whether the ® rm is internally or externally focused according to the competing values approach. This category represents the persons-oriented processes in the ® rm and contains two variables which are deemed important in determining the focus of the construction ® rm.
Strength of organizational culture which re¯ ects the internal climate in the ® rm and its strengths or weaknesses which are directly tied to the organizational effectiveness of the construction ® rm (Maloney and Federle, 1993).
Level of workers’ participation in decision making which underlies a ® rm’s attempt to empower and motivate its workers.
The fourth category represents the strategic means used by the construction ® rm to achieve effectiveness. It includes two variables: the level of strategic planning and the level of goal setting. The former underscores the ® rm’s attempt to adopt effective strategies that adapt and ® t its environment. The latter re¯ ects the level of importance that the ® rm puts on setting goals such as increasing pro® t levels, increasing cost-effectiveness, growth into other construction sectors, improving the level of process quality, improving client satisfaction and increasing workers’ empowerment.
Data and procedures
Since all the identi® ed variables cannot be directly observable through hard quantitative measures, questionnaires were designed to measure management and workers’ perceptions of the variables’ characteristics, aspects and magnitudes in the construction ® rm. A ® eld study was conducted to collect the relevant data. Seventy-six ® rms completed self-administered questionnaires satisfactorily. Two questionnaires were used; one to solicit responses from upper management and one from workers.
The ® rst questionnaire was used to solicit responses from two upper management level personnel (one at the home of® ce and the other at the site level). A shorter form of the ® rst questionnaire was used to solicit four responses from their workers. This shorter form excluded items which pertain to managerial variables including the level of subcontracting, the level of jointventuring, the level of planning and the level of goalsetting importance.
The raw scores for all variables except strength of culture were based on responses to a seven-point ordinal Likert scale (`very high’ 7 to `very low’ 1). For each variable, a different number of items (statements) were used in the measurement scale to which the respondents rate the attributes of the variable under question. For example, ® ve items were used to assess the level of integration in services offered by the construction ® rm and they included the extent of services offered by the ® rm in the A/E design ® eld, the level of self-owned construction materials supply, the level of construction ® nancing services offered to clients, the level of operating and maintenance services offered to customers and the extent of providing construction management services.
Equal weights were assumed for each item in calculating variables’ scores. For the variables where both responses were obtained from the two different levels in the ® rm, the responses were ® rst aggregated and then averaged within each ® rm in order to create ® rm-level scores.
A pilot study was conducted to test the reliability of the questionnaires in soliciting the desired data. Cronbach’s a -values for the scales used in the measurement indicate their fairness and suitability (0.66± 0.89).
The constant-sum scale used by Maloney and Federle
(1993) to measure their six major aspects of culture (dominant organizational characteristics, organizational climate, success factors, organizational glue, leadership style and management style) was also used here. The results were converted to a seven-point Likert scale in a two-step process to make it compatible with other scores.
Organizational effectiveness:
Effectiveness is operationalized by a measure of the construction ® rm’s performance in the three domains of effectiveness that are most commonly used in the construction industry. These relate to the work undertaken by the ® rm and its duration of execution, its cost of completion and its ® nished quality. The average level of performance over the previous 5 years of operation is used by this study as an output indicator of the effectiveness of the construction ® rm. It is calculated as the mean percentage of the percent of projects completed within scheduled time or less, the percent of projects that were completed within budgeted costs or less and the percent of projects that were completed without claims and within an acceptable level of compliance to clients’ speci® cations.
Analysis and results
The mean organizational scores for the 76 organizations in the sample were used to calculate Kendall t intercorrelation coef® cient scores for all 14 variables and the effectiveness indicated by the level of performance measure, Y. Table 2 shows the intercorrelation values and the corresponding p values for each correlation below it. p values are considered at the 0.05 level for signi® cance testing. Use of Kendall t correlation coef® cients in the analysis is due to the ordinal nature of the scales used in scoring and measuring the variables of the study.
As shown, the level of subcontracting (1) has a very low correlation with organizational effectiveness (t =0.0256) with no statistical signi® cance, which could be interpreted as there being no relationship. The level of integration in services (3), level of goal setting (12) and level of using joint venturing, partnering and strategic alliances (13) show low correlations with t values of 0.2896, 0.2643 and 0.2648, respectively. However, their level of statistical signi® cance is moderately high with p values of 0.0005, 0.0017 and 0.0032, respectively. This indicates a very weak and signi® cant relationship between these variables and the level of performance in the ® rms studied.
The level of adherence to rules and regulations (4), level of coordination (5), information ¯ ow (6) and level of control (14) have somewhat higher coef® cients that range from 0.3345 to 0.3630 and a high level of statistical signi® cance (all p values are , 0.0002). This is an indication that these variables have a weak but signi® cant relationship with the level of effectiveness, Y. Variables that include the level of planning (8) and extent of rules and regulations (11) have moderately strong and highly signi® cant relationships with Y shown by correlations value of 0.5542 and 0.5002, respectively (both p values , 0.0001).
Values of t of 0.7332, 0.6076, 0.8223 and 0.6921 and their respective p values (all p values , 0.0001) for the variables that include attitude towards change (2), level of multiproject handling ability (7), cultural strength (9) and level of workers’ participation in decision making (10) indicate that there are strong and highly signi® cant relationships between these variables and the level of effectiveness, Y.
Based on these ® ndings, it is seen that in the ® rms that were studied, a high level of organizational effectiveness indicated by a high level of performance in past projects is associated with a strong culture that promotes a high level of participation in decision-making processes by its workers, a high level of positive attitude toward change by management and workers, a high level of planning as a strategy to adapt to environmental risks, a high level of multiproject handling ability and a moderate level of using rules and regulations by the ® rm. These variables account for much of the variability in performance of the ® rms studied. However, the other variables that have weak but signi® cant associations also contribute to high levels of effectiveness in the ® rms studied.
Typically, there are two goals of mathematical modelling. One is to obtain a valid estimate of a causal relationship and the other is to obtain a good predictive model. According to Retherford and Choe (1993), when the goal is `prediction’ it is appropriate to develop linear models because of their simplicity of use. As the goal of this study was to obtain a prediction model based on the linear combination of the hypothesized variables, a statistical computer program (SAS) was used in developing, diagnosing and ® tting the desired linear model. Multiple regression procedures based on the least square method were used to estimate the best model with the highest r2 value based on analysis of variance and parameter estimates. Only 66 records from the 76 records collected were used in the model development. The remaining ten records were reserved for model validation purposes.
In developing the model, dummy variables are used to code the variables because of the ordinal nature of scales used in scoring the ® rms in the sample. Dummy variables or contrast variables’ use is proposed as outlined by Retherford and Choe (1993). The prime function of dummy variables is to represent categorical and ordinal variables to gain a better realistic model than by modelling the ordinal variables as ratio or interval variables. According to Judd and McClelland (1989) m-1 contrast codes must be employed to code a categorical or ordinal variable with m levels.
Therefore, in coding the seven level (7=very high to 1=very low) scales used in the measurement, six dummy variables must be employed to represent each of the original variables. This would have resulted in dealing with a large number of variables in the model which would render it impractical. A solution was to crash down the seven-point ordinal scale to a three-point scale of high, moderate and low for each of the variables. Two contrast codes were employed for each variable which made the possible total number of variables in the model more manageable. The three levels in the crashed scales were assumed between values that mark the 33rd and 67th percentiles of the cumulative distribution for each variable obtained from scores on the seven-point scales. Table 3 shows these values for the 14 variables. So that all scores below the value that marks the 33rd percentile on the cumulative distribution were classi® ed as low scores, all scores that fall between the 33rd and 67th percentile values were classi® ed as moderate and all scores above the 67th percentile were classi® ed as high.
To illustrate the use of the table, an example is discussed. A ® rm was scored by its management and workers and an average aggregate score was calculated to equal 4 relating to the strength of culture variable (9). To convert this score to a high, moderate or low level rating,
Table 3	Cumulative distribution percentiles for mean aggregated variables’ scores based on seven-point
67th percentile
Level of subcontracting
Attitude toward change
Level of integration in services
Level of adherence to rules and regulations
Level of coordination
Level of information ¯ ow
Level of multiproject handling ability
Level of planning
Strength of culture
Level of participation in decision making
Extent of rules and regulations
Level of goal setting
Level of joint venturing, partnering and alliances
Level of control
the table is used. A moderate level rating is indicated because the score falls between the 33rd percentile value of 3.5 and the 67th percentile value of 5.3. If the score is above 5.3, a high level rating is indicated and if it is below 3.5, a low level rating is indicated.
Each Xi of the 14 hypothesized variables is coded by two dummy variables (Xi1) and (Xi2). As shown in Table 4, the two dummy variables can represent the three levels for each variable. When the level of Xi is determined to be high, the variable is represented by the situation Xi1=(0) and Xi2=(1). When the level of Xi is judged to be medium, Xi is represented by Xi1=(1) and Xi2=(0). Where the level is low, the variable is represented by Xi1=(0) and Xi2=(0). It should be noted that substitution for dummy variables should always be considered in pairs to indicate the proper level of the variable. For a low level rating, both dummy variables that represent that variable should be given the value of 0.
moderate or high level rating, the value of 1 is assigned to the dummy variable that represents that proper level and the value of 0 is given to the other dummy variable.
A multivariate linear regression was performed to develop a model. As shown in Equation 1, the general regression model considers 28 dummy variables to represent the original 14 variables. The intercept a is the low level or the reference level for the construction organizations studied (Xi1=0, Xi2=0). The b coef® cient is the effect of each variable on the level of organizational effectiveness.
After analysis of variance and diagnosis of residuals to check on the assumptions of linearity, the ® tted model yielded by SAS procedures is shown in Equation 2. The model is signi® cant at a =0.05 and p< 0.0001.
Dummy variables that represent the high and moderate levels of only ® ve of the original 14 hypothesized predictors were determined to be signi® cant in predicting the level of effectiveness, Y, based on their p values. These are X21 and X22 representing the levels of attitude toward change by management and workers (2), X71 and X72 representing the levels of multiproject handling ability (7), X81 and X82 representing the level of planning (8), X91 and X92 representing strength of culture (9) and X101 and X102 representing level of workers’ participation in decision making (10).
Analysis of variance shows that the model has a root mean square error of 0.043 which means that the model has a 4.3% error in prediction. The model’s r2 and adjusted r2 are 0.93 and 0.91, respectively.
The partial coef® cients in the model for any two dummy variables represent the effect of being moderate or high level in any of the ® ve variables. A value of 0.426 is shown
Table 4 Variable’s levels and corresponding coding of dummy variables

as the intercept in the model above. This value represents the low level or the reference level for the construction ® rms studied. It also represents the predicted level of organizational effectiveness in a ® rm with low ratings in all of the ® ve variables. It is worth noting here that the actual level of effectiveness for such a ® rm may fall anywhere between 0.426 and 0. For a ® rm with high level ratings in all of the ® ve variables, a maximum predicted level of effectiveness of 0.862 is calculated by the model. The actual level of effectiveness for such an organization may fall anywhere between this value and 1.00.
It is noted that the value of Yis in¯ uenced very little by whether a ® rm is rated as having a moderate level of attitude toward change or having a high level as represented by the two coef® cients of 0.076 and 0.081 for X21 and X22, respectively. The same holds true for the variable level of planning. The coef® cient for a moderate level of planning (X81) is 0.048 and 0.049 for a high level of planning (X82). This could be interpreted as being that effectiveness is associated with a moderate level of attitude towards change and a moderate level of planning in the group of organizations studied.
Level of workers’ participation in decision making in the construction ® rms studied, impacts on the value of Y by 0.102 (coef® cient for X102) for high level ratings and 0.062 (coef® cient for X101) for moderate level ratings. This indicates that an increase in the level of organizational effectiveness is associated with an increase in the level of workers’ participation in decision making in the ® rms studied.
Rating the construction ® rm as having a high level of multiple project-handling ability contributes 0.099 (coef® cient for X72), while rating it as having a moderate ability contributes only 0.048 (coef® cient for X71). This seems to indicate that a high level of multiple projecthandling ability contributes more than double that of a moderate level to an increase in the predicted level of organizational effectiveness.
There is also a difference in the contribution to the predicted level of effectiveness of a construction ® rm, Y, between a moderate level strength of culture (X91 coef® cient=0.058) and a high level strength of culture (X92 coef® cient=0.105).
Table 5	Predictions of organizational effectiveness based on organizational ratings




Levels are shown by L, M and H to indicate low, moderate and high levels, respectively.
The prediction of the level of effectiveness by the model is based on the possible combination of high, moderate and low ratings of the ® ve variables for any organization. Table 5 shows the ratings of the ten ® rms whose records were not used in model development, the predicted level of effectiveness and the actual level calculated from management response. The ® rst record belongs to a ® rm with the following ratings of the ® ve variables: highly favourable attitude toward change (X21=0, X22=1), a moderate level of multiproject handling ability (X71=1, X72=0), performs planning very regularly (X81=0, X82=1), has a strong culture (X91=0, X92=1) and a moderate level of participation in decision making by workers (X101=1, X102=0). The level of organizational effectiveness predicted by the model for the ® rm is equal to 0.77. Based on this value, the prediction can be made that this construction ® rm has a level of organizational effectiveness that would cause it to perform in 77% of its work projects on time and/or within budget and/or according to speci® cations and unsuccessfully in the remaining 23%. The level calculated from the management response is approximately 79%.
The second record belongs to a ® rm that was rated as having an unfavourable (low) attitude toward change (X21=0, X22=0), a low level of multiproject handling ability (X71=0, X72=0), a moderate level of planning (X81=1, X82=0), a moderate strength of culture (X91=1, X92=0), and a low level of workers’ participation in decision making (X101=0, X102=0). The level of organizational effectiveness predicted is approximately 53% and the actual level calculated is 58%.
As seen in the table, the predicted levels of effectiveness are very comparable with the actual levels of effectiveness calculated from data records. This indicates the robustness of the ® tted model.
It should be noted that the model is intended as a tool that gives management an idea about how organizational characteristics measured by the variables in the model in¯ uence the overall performance and not speci® cally the rate performance on a project by project basis. According to the Y value achieved, the conclusion could be made that a ® rm would perform within scheduled time and/or within costs and/or according to speci® cations in some projects and that it would fail to achieve performance in all other cases (1– Y).
Summary and conclusions
Fourteen organizational variables were identi® ed to predict the effectiveness of the construction ® rm. Analysis of data from 76 construction ® rms indicated that only ® ve of the original 14 variables are signi® cant in predicting their level of effectiveness. These variables include ® rms’ attitude toward change, its level of multiple project-handling ability, its level of planning, its strength of culture and the level of workers’ participation in decision making in the ® rm.
The developed model is a practical tool. By rating the ® ve variables in the model using the scales developed by this methodology, it is very simple to calculate the level of organizational effectiveness of the construction ® rm.
