Causal Factors of Corruption in Construction Project Management: An Overview
21 July 2017/Accepted: 31 October 2017/Published online: 11 November 2017
Springer Science+Business Media B.V., part of Springer Nature 2017
Abstract The development of efficient and strategic anti-corruption measures can be better achieved if a deeper understanding and identification of the causes of corruption are established. Over the past years, many studies have been devoted to the research of corruption in construction management (CM). This has resulted in a significant increase in the body of knowledge on the subject matter, including the causative factors triggering these corrupt practices. However, an apropos systematic assessment of both past and current studies on the subject matter which is needful for the future endeavor is lacking. Moreover, there is an absence of unified view of the causative factors of corruption identified in construction project management (CPM). This paper, therefore, presents a comprehensive review of the causes of corruption from selected articles in recognized construction management journals to address the mentioned gaps. A total number of 44 causes of corruption were identified from 37 publications and analyzed in terms of existing causal factors of corruption, annual trend of publications and the thematic categorization of the identified variables. The most identifiable causes were over close relationships, poor professional ethical standards, negative industrial and working conditions, negative role models and inadequate sanctions. A conceptual framework of causes of corruption was established, after categorizing the 44 variables into five unique
Department of Building and Real Estate, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong
Department of Building, National Univ. of Singapore, 4 Architecture Drive, Singapore 117566, Singapore
categories. In descending order, the five constructs are Psychosocial-Specific Causes, Organizational-Specific Causes, Regulatory-Specific Causes, Project-Specific Causes and Statutory-Specific Causes. This study extends the current literature of corruption research in construction management and contributes to a deepened understanding of the causal instigators of corruption identified in CPM. The findings from this study provide valuable information and extended knowledge to industry practitioners and policymakers as well as anti-corruption agencies in the formulation and direction of anti-corruption measures. To corruption researchers in CM, this study is vital for further research.
Keywords Corruption  Construction  Project management  Cultural dimensions
Introduction
Corruption in the construction industry can be defined as the misappropriation of delegated authority at the expense of a construction project (Le et al. 2014a, b; Shan et al. 2016a). It occurs when corrupt professionals within the industry effect a negative decision to engage in corruption. The corrupt professionals are classified into the categories of the demand side and the supply side (Boyd and Padilla 2009). However, the authors raised the notion that, aside from the demand side and the supply side of corrupt professionals, there is another class of parties within the industry known as the condoners. The condoners are referred to the class of professionals or workers in the industry who directly or indirectly affect the incidence of corrupt practices by remaining silent or not bothering about it and on other occasions, they feel reluctant to report any incidence or case of corruption. This is evident in the construction industry in the quest to procure construction or other infrastructure projects. And as the result of this and many other reasons, the construction industry is branded as the most corrupt sector in the world (Transparency International 2005, 2012; Krishnan 2010).
The evolvement of corruption has also led to the discoveries of different forms prevalent in the sector today. They include money laundering, clientelism, ghosting, patronage, bid rigging, etc. (Stansbury 2009a, b; Zhang et al. 2017; Bowen et al. 2012; Waara and Bro¨chner 2006). These forms exist today due to causative measures that were either not tackled nor thoroughly tackled (Le et al. 2014a, b). Corruption is known for breeding cynicism, dents societal values, demeans those involved, hinders decision making, degrades the quality of projects hence reducing the lifespan of buildings, depriving most inhabitants of quality living and most importantly resulting in the loss of human lives and properties among other devastating and damaging effects (Lewis 2003; Transparency International 2005). It is necessary that all participants of the industry including professionals, clients, and the government exceptforthecorrupt,concur onacooperativeefforttotacklethisissuethatshouldnot be viewed as a competitive issue (Boyd and Padilla 2009). Researchers and anticorruption institutions have played active roles in examining some of these negative drivers which are referred to as the causes of corruption according to this study. The incessant devotion to corruption research in the construction industry over the years has, therefore, revealed several causative factors that contribute to incidences of corruption. However, few efforts have been made to systematically review the causes ofcorruptionintheconstructionindustryonawiderscope,eventhoughtheyarevastly identified in different studies and contexts. This study, therefore, aims to fill the gap and add on to the existing body of literature by presenting a thorough review of the causative factors of corruption in the construction industry from the project management perspective which is vital and needed for further research.
Corruption During the Construction Project Process
The literature is not consistent with the etymology of corruption, for instance, while Hogdson and Jiang (2007) attributes the root of the word ‘‘corruption’’ to the Latin adjective ‘corruptus’, which means destroyed, broken or spoiled, Johnston (1996) also attributes its derivation from the Latin word ‘corruptio’ which signifies a wicked behavior, putridity or a moral decay. However, in all instances, one commonality that exists between the two views is moral decadence, as is evident in the industry today (Henry 2009; Sohail and Cavill 2008; Bowen et al. 2012; Shan et al. 2015b). Jain (2001) purported that corruption has many definitions across diverse contexts but per the suitability of this context, that is the construction industry, corruption is deemed to be the abuse of entrusted power and construction project resources for personal gain (Le et al. 2014a, b). Corruption, which may occur in varying forms as mentioned and can transpire in any construction activity and at any phase of the construction process, that is, from conception to completion (Chan and Owusu 2017; Tabish and Jha 2011; Stansbury 2009b; International Federation of Consulting Engineers (FIDIC) 2016). In the procurement of construction works, International Federation of Consulting Engineers (FIDIC) (2016) opined that corruption might occur in many instances such as decision making on claims, payment certificate issuance to contractors, construction supervision, in tender evaluation, etc. The stages involved in construction process are therefore exposed to these corruption modes and other examples of corrupt practices due to the causative factors identified in this study. Although certain stages of the construction process are deemed to be more prone to corruption than others, no empirical studies show the stage of the construction process that records the highest frequency of corruption cases. Some corrupt practices peculiar to different stages of the construction process that have been captured in the literature over the years have been encapsulated together to develop Fig. 1 which demonstrates the corrupt practices that have been reported in recorded studies (corruption research in construction) over the years.
Figure 1 illustrates the framework for corrupt practices, formulated for easy identification of the likely incidences of corrupt acts that may transpire during a project process. It was developed from adaptations of the frameworks developed by Sohail and Cavill (2008), Zou (2006), Stansbury and Stansbury (2008), Chan and Owusu (2017), Bowen et al. (2007, 2012), Tabish and Jha (2011), and Shan et al. (2016b), as well as the findings identified by the publications selected for this study. Most of these studies may mention either one or multiple corrupt practices with
their associated actors and the stage of construction process where the identified acts are likely to occur. Therefore, after a thorough assessment of the identified acts, the framework was developed to highlight some possible acts of corruption in a construction process. Although the acts identified at each stage are not exhaustive, the framework was developed to inform industry practitioners, policymakers, anticorruption institutions as well as researchers about the probable examples of corrupt activities identified in construction processes over the years and the need to avoid them.
Preventing Corruption
Several preventive and reactive measures commonly referred to as anti-corruption measures or strategies have been formulated by researchers, anti-corruption institutions, policy makers, etc. They include transparency mechanisms, ethical codes, administrative reforms stringent rules and legislation, rigorous technical auditing systems, whistle-blowing mechanisms, contract monitoring schemes among many others. These measures have been consistent with several empirical studies to be effective anti-corruption strategies formulated to mitigate corruption in the construction sector (Sohail and Cavill 2008; Shan et al. 2015b; Boyd and Padilla 2009; Bowen et al. 2012; Hartley 2009; Le et al. 2014b; Also, these are some of the noted anti-corruption measures identified from the literature known to have dealt with the issue of corruption in the industry. For instance, Zou (2006) reported three approaches to deal with corruption in the construction industry. They are stipulated as follows: (1) the development of an ethical and honest construction culture, (2) establishing a policy of regular and random inspections and lastly instituting construction works and processes supervision throughout the lifecycle of a project. He pointed out that the first approach was as a long-term measure while the following two were regarded as short-term strategies. Although substantial efforts to thwart the incidence of corruption have been stipulated by researchers in the construction field, other notable international organizations such as the United Nations, the World Bank, Transparency International, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the Global Infrastructure anti-corruption center (GIACC) among many others have played active roles in helping to fight corruption either directly or indirectly in the construction industry. These efforts are rarely reported in studies, and as part of the identified preventive measures, this study presents the efforts made by the international organizations in the next subsection. This information may guide researchers as a source of reference to develop further anti-corruption measures or enhance the already existing ones to tackle the causes of corruption identified in the construction industry. Due to space/wording limit, some of the contributions of the various organizations to the fight against corruption in the industry are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Overview of selected organizational initiatives to tackle corruption in the construction Industry
