Role of Management Strategies in Improving Labor
Productivity in General Construction Projects in New
Managerial Perspective
This study aimed to quantify the effectiveness of a set of implemented management strategies including incentive programs, labor management, training, communication, supervision, planning, resource scheduling, use of advanced construction methods, and management of construction in improving labor productivity. These management strategies are widely implemented because they are believed to improve labor productivity in general construction projects. However, their effectiveness and relationship with labor productivity have not been systematically studied. Data were collected from 111 general construction projects. The statistical tests confirmed that labor productivity is significantly higher in construction projects with a high-level implementation of the management strategies compared with low-level implementation. The results showed that management strategies such as communication and incentive programs have a strong positive relationship with labor productivity. This paper’s major contribution to the overall body of knowledge is that it proves and quantifies the effectiveness of and the relationship of these management strategies with labor productivity through more comprehensive statistical methods than previous studies. It also introduces a tool to assist construction managers in benchmarking the implementation level of the management strategies against similar projects to reveal the areas that require further improvement to achieve higher labor productivity. 10.1061/(ASCE) ME.1943-5479.0000641. © 2018 American Society of Civil Engineers.
Authorkeywords: Labor productivity; Management strategies; Construction management; Productivity.
Introduction
The construction industry is a significant driver of thenational economy (Alaghbari et al. 2017; Naoum 2016). In New Zealand, the industry contributed 5.2% of the gross domestic product (GDP) in 2013 (Statistics New Zealand 2015), and in Australia, it accounted for 7.7% of the GDP in 2015 (Department of Industry, Innovation and Science 2015). These figures indicate that the performance of the industry plays a significant role in the growth of the economy nationally (Naoum 2016). Thus, the construction industry must improve its productivity by efficient use of laborers and other resources (Hughes and Thorpe 2014). The industry has achieved substantial improvements by implementing advanced technologies, materials, and heavy equipment (Caldas et al. 2015; Goodrum et al. 2009; Grau et al. 2009). Despite improvements, labor productivity is still problematic; for years, the construction industry has been
Ph.D. Candidate, Faculty of Engineering, Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Univ. of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland 1142, New Zealand (corresponding author). ngho228@ aucklanduni.ac.nz
Senior Lecturer, Faculty of Engineering, Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Univ. of Auckland, Private Bag 92019,
3 Professor, Faculty of Engineering, Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Univ. of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland 1142, New
Innovation Strategy Analyst, Fletcher Building, Private Bag 92114, Auckland 1142, New Zealand. mehdi.shahbazpour@fbu.com
Note. This manuscript was submitted on September 8, 2017; approved on March 13, 2018; published online on July 27, 2018. Discussion period open until December 27, 2018; separate discussions must be submitted for individual papers. This paper is part of the Journal of Management in Engineering, © ASCE, ISSN 0742-597X.
struggling to improve labor productivity (Heravi and Eslamdoost 2015). The cost of labor is the main motivation for this improvement since it accounts for 30–50% of total construction costs (Heravi and Eslamdoost 2015; Nasir et al. 2015; Shan et al. 2015). In addition, construction laborers spend 50–75% of their productive time on non-value-added activities that do not affect the overall performance of the project (Diekmann et al. 2004). Labor productivity has a substantial impact on the final cost of projects (Liu et al. 2011). Improving labor productivity is a key factor in executing successful construction projects that lead to significant profits for the industry and its clients. It will also assist the industry to enhance overall performance and, in so doing, improve the contribution to the growth of the national economy.
Improving labor productivity is a management case (Nasir et al. 2015). Construction managers apply a wide range of management strategies at the project level to improve labor productivity and achieve project objectives (Dai and Goodrum 2012; Dai et al. 2009; Shan et al. 2011, 2015). These strategies are based on the experience and knowledge of the managers. Quite often, construction managers fail to apply effective strategies that enhance labor productivity in construction projects because their actual impact on labor productivity is not evident (Caldas et al. 2015). In order to improve labor productivity, it is necessary for construction managers to know the extent to which the implemented management strategies affect labor productivity. Because of the shortage of skilled laborers in the construction industry (Brandenburg et al. 2006; Dai and Goodrum 2012), identifying the strategies and practices that can improve the effectiveness of the workforce becomes a major priority (Tsehayae and Robinson Fayek 2014). However, the main challenge for construction management teams is to identify the overall impact of their strategies on labor productivity. Shan et al. (2015) urged researchers to investigate the relationship between management strategies and labor productivity to determine the most effective management strategies that can be applied by construction managers to improve labor productivity. Understanding the relationship between these two variables is critical for construction management teams, especially if resources are limited and they have to prioritize the allocation of the resources (Nasirzadeh and Nojedehi 2013).
Although there is a significant amount of literature on factors that affect labor productivity in different locationsand project types, few studies have attempted to provide a method to investigate and quantify the impacts of management strategies on labor productivity. The impacts of the management strategies on labor productivity need to be quantified through a systematic and comprehensive approach. This is crucial in decision making for planning and scheduling current and future projects (Heravi and Eslamdoost 2015; Song and AbouRizk 2008). This study fills this gap by identifying the impacts of management strategies on labor productivity through statistical methods. The outcomes of the study can assist practitioners to develop a wider perspective regarding the management strategies that improve labor productivity and to achieve an efficient utilization of the workforce. To complete general construction projects more productively, practitioners can allocate resources and focus on the management strategies with high impacts on labor productivity.
In this study, management practices refer to individual practices that are performed by a construction management team in order to improve labor productivity. Management strategies comprise several management practices with similar concepts that affect certain areas.
Construction Productivity Definitions
The concept of productivity sounds simple and clear. Productivity can be defined as the ratio of output divided by input. However, it is hard to define and measure, particularly in the construction industry (Nasir 2013). According to Park et al. (2005), there are no standard definitions and tools that can be used to collect productivity data in the US construction industry. The lack of sufficient and reliable data is the main barrier in measuring productivity in construction projects. Nevertheless, there are terms that are generally used in the industry to measure productivity, although they vary across different projects or construction firms. These terms are briefly presented here; for more information, see Thomas et al. (1990).
Total factor productivity (TFP) takes into account multiple factors for producing an output. It is a ratio of total output divided by all inputs. It is given by the equation
This term is a useful macro-level productivity measure that is mostly applied in economic studies and strategic decision making. TFP is not applicable in construction projects or sites because there are significant problems tracking all the required inputs (Park et al. 2005; Thomas et al. 1990).
Factor productivity (FP) or the project-specific model (Shehata and El-Gohary 2011) was introduced by Thomas et al. (1990) as a suitable term for project-specific purposes. It is a more accurate definition than TFP and is useful for specific program planning and estimating on individual projects (El-Gohary and Aziz 2014; Nasir 2013). FP is a ratio of an output (units) to dollars of input (Thomas et al. 1990)
¼ Physicaloutput unitð	Þ
Construction companies prefer to measure productivity through a more specific term in which the units of outputs are specific and can be measured accurately (Shehata and El-Gohary 2011). Single factor productivity (SFP) is a narrowly defined version of FP. Because labor productivity has a substantial impact on the cost of projects, contractors are mostly interested in labor productivity. Labor productivity is categorized under SFP because a single factor (labor cost or work hours) is considered the only input to calculate productivity (Thomas et al. 1990). Labor productivity can be calculated in one of the following ways:
Labor productivity ¼	ð Þ
Labor productivity ¼

Construction companies use different terms to calculate labor productivity since there is no standard definition of productivity in the industry (Nasir 2013; Park et al. 2005). In theabsence of a standard definition and data collection tool, benchmarking labor productivity among different construction projects is a problematic case in the construction management domain (Park et al. 2005; Shehata and El-Gohary 2011).
Factors Affecting Labor Productivity
Rojas and Aramvareekul (2003) found that the fact that labor productivity can be managed and controlled indicates a massive opportunity for labor productivity improvements in the construction industry. Consequently, identifying factors that affect labor productivity in the construction industry has received significant attention from both academia and practitioners. Numerous studies have attempted to ascertain the most dominant factors in labor productivity (Table 1). Because of space limitations, only the top 10 factors of each study have been entered into the table. These factors can be categorized in three main areas (management, human, and external). A quick review of Table 1 shows that the proportion of management-related factors in top 10 factors is higher than human and external factors. Although other factors are categorized under human andexternal areas, some of them can be influencedby different management strategies and practices such as human resource management. This highlights the crucial role of construction managers and their strategies in labor productivity improvement (ElGohary and Aziz 2014). In addition, it also supports the notion that labor productivity is manageable and can be improved by applying effective management practices (Liberda et al. 2003).
Although many studies in the construction industry have aimed at establishing a generalized list of factors with substantial impacts on labor productivity, there is no agreement among researchers on such a list (Panas and Pantouvakis 2010). Furthermore, there is no general method to assess the accuracy of the impact of the identified factors on labor productivity (Caldas et al. 2015; Yi and Chan 2014). Such a method would be very beneficial for construction practitioners to improve labor productivity by identifying and applying the most effective factors. It would also help them to
Factors affecting labor productivity in the construction industry

