BIM applications toward key performance indicators of construction projects in Iran
To cite this article: Mostafa Khanzadi, Moslem Sheikhkhoshkar & Saeed Banihashemi (2020) BIM applications toward key performance indicators of construction projects in Iran, International Journal of Construction Management, 20: 4, 305-320, DOI:
To link to this article:
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
BIM applications toward key performance indicators of construction projects in Iran
Department of Civil Engineering, Iran University of Science and Technology, Tehran, Iran; Faculty of Built Environment & Design, University of Canberra, Canberra, Australia
Building Information Modeling (BIM) has recently emerged as a novel technology worldwide however literature review reveals a salient gap in the identification of BIM capabilities in Key Performance Indicators (KPI) of construction projects in Iran. Therefore, the aim of this research is to identify and prioritize the BIM applications toward KPIs in light of the construction stage of projects life cycle in Iran. To do this, a review of literature was performed on the KPIs and associated BIM contributions and the resultants were customized for Iranian context through a tworound Delphi study. An advanced Fuzzy-AHP approach was then applied in the prioritizations of KPIs and associated BIM capabilities via collecting data from construction practitioners. It was identified that quality improvement, sustainable construction and construction cost reduction are the top three KPIs that can be benefitted from BIM applications in the construction stage of building projects. It was also concluded that project coordination, clash detection, 4D and 5D BIM are the subsequent beneficial effects of BIM on the construction project KPIs in Iran. This study is a point of departure for BIM-based research and its managerial perspectives outlining an insight toward the application of BIM in the construction projects of Iran.
Key performance indicators; construction industry;
Introduction
One of the major responsibilities of a project management team in construction industry is to finish the project within the budget, time and quality stipulated in the contract documents (Wang et al., 2004). As the time goes by, the construction process gets more complicated, hence controlling all aspects of a project requires a bird’s eye view over its life cycle. Although the fundamental tenet in success of this end is having an efficient and organized system of management, monitoring, implementation, collection and dissemination of information from the project to the parties involved, dominance of the CAD have overshadowed this momentum (Banihashemi et al., 2011). Such shortcoming is particularly intensified in the developing countries such as Iran where low productivity, high-level of waste, recurrent cost overruns and chronic delays in completion of construction projects are still major issues (Ghoddousi et al., 2015). The common project management method applied in most construction firms today in Iran is documentbased approach in which individuals are assigned to obtain data from different parties involved in the construction stage. As a consequence, wide range of construction data is typically collected in the field and in a fragmented nature without taking their holistic implications into account toward managing the construction process efficiently.
2018 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
In the recent years, Building Information Modeling (BIM) has emerged as a comprehensive concept of process and tools which integrates all projects required data and information. BIM supports new information workflows and integrates them more closely with existing simulation and analysis tools used by consultants and contractors (Eastman et al., 2011). Since most processes in BIM are automated and the involvement of human resources is minimized, it is claimed that by using BIM, the efficiency of monitoring, controlling and managing in construction projects’ life cycle is enhanced remarkably (Golparvar-Fard et al., 2015). But, in spite of the proven advantages of BIM employment in the construction projects and observed trend in its adoption worldwide, the rate of BIM implementation is far below the current potentials in Iran and in the construction stage, particularly (Hosseini et al., 2016a). The reason for this fact might lie in the silence of literature on the studies toward the investigation of BIM application in the construction stage of projects in Iran and its contribution to key indicators of managing these projects. There is a conspicuous lack of studies on the identification of BIM potential areas of utilization in the construction stage and the associations with the construction KPIs. Against this backdrop, an evaluation of decision criteria for construction aspects of BIM and their relative importance regarding the fundamental KPIs such as time, cost and quality can be a significant achievement for construction project practitioners and policy makers.
With this respect, the appropriate decision-making criteria grounded on BIM and KPIs should encapsulate a complex trade-off of different processes requiring all alternatives to be considered simultaneously. As a powerful approach in resolving multi-criteria decisionmaking problems, Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP), introduced by Saaty (1988), has been used in diverse range of construction related researches such as risk assessment and identification (Aminbakhsh et al., 2013), sustainability assessment (Banihashemi et al., 2014) and KPIs (Ugwu and Haupt, 2007). However, incapability of AHP in minimizing the inherent subjectivity and uncertainty in correlating the judgment of an expert to a precise number necessitates its integration with more advanced methods. Thus, using fuzzy technique within the structure of AHP seems a promising approach to tackle with this challenge (Buckley, 1985).
A review of literature shows that no research hitherto studies the capabilities of BIM in the construction stage of buildings project life cycle in Iran and forges a link with construction KPIs through a robust and unified approach. Diverse capabilities of BIM in terms of enhancing performance and productivity have evidently been acknowledged in seminal studies in the construction field (Azhar, 2011; Sun et al., 2015). Accordingly, a growing interest towards BIM adoption and implementation has been observed throughout the construction industry globally. This includes a wide range of countries in the Middle East, which have attempted to promote BIM implementation on their construction projects (buildingSMART, 2011).
While anecdotal evidence attests to the fact that Iran is lagging in terms of adoption of BIM on construction projects, no research has been undertaken to provide a picture of the potential application of BIM use and practice in Iran. Existing studies from the Middle East e.g. (buildingSMART, 2011) have had a bias towards countries in the Persian Gulf and have not covered all the countries in the Middle East (i.e. Iran, Israel and Turkey). Other studies on BIM in developing countries have focused on countries other than Iran such as Malaysia, Sri Lanka (Rogers et al., 2015a, 2015b), and India (Kumar and Mukherjee, 2009). Factors determining the applications and practices associated with BIM are shaped by the industry context and have to be investigated within the natural context of a country or company (Aranda-Mena et al., 2009, Poirier et al., 2015). As such, findings of studies from other countries are not directly applicable to the Iranian context. Moreover, available published studies on BIM in Iran such as the paper by Kiani et al. (2015) merely focused on the application of BIM for scheduling projects, thus the broad status of BIM in Iran has remained unexplored. This research is to address these things. It is first intended to discover the construction KPIs in Iran’s context. Then, the potential aspects of BIM application in the construction stage of building projects are identified in view of Iranian experts. Finally, the associations among the construction KPIs with BIM capability criteria and their relative importance are developed through Fuzzy-AHP approach.
The recent trend towards economic growth in Iran has resulted in a demand for construction projects which in turn has flattered the attempts geared in good governance of these projects. Consequently, project managers in Iran are still lagging behind in embracing the concept of productivity and success in managing projects (Ghoddousi et al., 2015). In 2016, Iran has an estimated Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of 412.2 billion USD making it the second largest economy in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region, behind Saudi Arabia. Of this, the construction market in Iran comprised a huge 154 billion USD (Ghoddousi et al., 2015), and is expected to grow to 196 billion USD in 2020. The recent lifting of sanctions and consequent injection of foreign direct investment will serve to accelerate Iran’s plans for infrastructure development. The size of the country’s construction project is to be doubled, and many megaprojects for the development of dams, tunnels and industrial assets have been announced. In essence, construction projects managers in global and local context are expected to deliver projects within the managerial objectives however the low productivity and fragmentation rampant in the construction industry of Iran requires a serious paradigm shift in taking the construction KPIs into consideration in light of emerging methods and technologies.
Aspects of BIM application in the construction stage.
BIM Applications in Construction Stage
