Life cycle environmental impact assessment to manage and optimize construction waste using Building Information Modeling (BIM)
To cite this article: Farzad Jalaei, Milad Zoghi & Afshin Khoshand (2021) Life cycle environmental impact assessment to manage and optimize construction waste using Building Information Modeling (BIM), International Journal of Construction Management, 21: 8, 784-801,
To link to this article:
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
Life cycle environmental impact assessment to manage and optimize construction waste using Building Information Modeling (BIM)
Department of Building, Civil and Environmental Engineering, Concordia University, Montreal, Canada; Department of Civil Engineering, University of Khajeh Nasir Toosi, Tehran, Iran
The construction industry has become more interested in moving towards implementing an innovative method to reduce wastes and Environmental Impacts (EIs) during the construction stage. Tools and methods represented in different frameworks to estimate construction wastes are limited to the end of life stage of building projects. A common method employed for this quantification is Life Cycle Assessment (LCA), which is globally recognized as one of the most complete methods for the environmental impact assessment of buildings. Building Information Modeling (BIM) would be an ideal platform to integrate LCA to assist in this process. However, BIM and LCA tools are currently not fully interoperable.
This research aims to represent a methodology to quantify total waste produced in the building’s lifecycle. The main reasons for producing waste are examined profoundly and some solutions leading to waste reduction are proposed. Additionally, the environmental impact of the materials converted to waste is evaluated in an integrated environment by developing an addin inside BIM tool, which calculates waste produced in each step of buildings’ lifespan to be used by LCA tool. An application of an actual building project will be presented in order to illustrate the usefulness and capabilities of the developed approaches.
Building Information Modeling; Construction waste; life cycle assessment;
Introduction
Cities are generally facing serious environmental problems mainly caused by multiple polluting industries. The construction industry is known as one of the main sources of environmental pollution in the cities. This industry depends on the extraction of raw materials. Most of the adverse EIs caused by construction industry can be attributed to the wastes from Construction and Demolition (C&D) processes (Bakshan et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2014). The C&D waste is a general term referring to any materials, which are produced as waste through different construction activities (Pacheco-Torgal, 2013). It should be noted that the most generated C&D wastes are considered as inert materials, which may not pose a threat similar to hazardous, municipal and solid wastes (Wang et al., 2004), but C&D waste could have a significant impact on the environment, including incremental greenhouse gas emissions and energy consumption, resource depletion, land deterioration and also environmental pollution (Mah et. al., 2016).
It is worth noting that the C&D waste generation not only can cause environmental problems, but also imposes extra cost for management. As presented in Table 1, generation of each ton of C&D waste forces a considerable variable cost (in addition to the constant cost) to the total cost of C&D waste management (Ibrahim, 2016).
2019 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
The production of building materials creates some EIs and dissipate a large amount of energy, which are intensified through the demolition process at the end of building’s life. Recently, an awareness regarding the detrimental impacts of building waste on the environment has been escalated. In most European countries, it is economically feasible to recycle up to 80-90% of the total amount of C&D waste (Lauritzen, 1998). Typically, the C&D waste comprises wood products, asphalt, walls, and prefabricated plaster products (masonry materials), concrete, brick, mosaic, tile, ceramic, cobblestone, and considerable amounts of some mixtures including metals, plastics, soil, roof cladding, insulation, paper, and plasterboard (Esin et al.,2007). The architecture, engineering and construction (AEC) industry has been witnessing an increasing demand in Building Information Modeling (BIM) used in parallel with the continuous momentum of the sustainable building movement in the last decade or so. The BIM impact on design practice is significant as it introduces new processes and ways of delivering designs and construction and facilities management services. According to Kubba (2012) and Becerik-Gerber & Rice (2010), the development of a schematic model is superior to the generation of a detailed building model, allowing the designer to make a more accurate assessment of the proposed scheme, evaluate whether it meets the functional and sustainable requirements set out by the owner and increase project performance and overall quality. The introduction of BIM along with the emergence of challenging global issues like sustainability and environmental impact assessment of building requires that the design team incorporates basic performance analysis of an early design phase. Environmental performance, special quality analysis and social impact need to be incorporated into the framework by further developing the concept of virtual space and virtual building (Kam et al., 2004). The BIM helps owners visualize the spatial organization of the building and understand the sequence of construction activities and the project duration (Eastman et al., 2008). Generally, the use of BIM tools to design sustainable buildings necessitates the selection of materials and systems so that their EIs could be easily evaluated. Thus, an assessment process needs to be applied to quantify the impacts of the selected materials on the environment. The common method employed is Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) that is a tool used for evaluating environmental problems (Khasreen et al., 2009). Integrating BIM with LCA tools in the conceptual stage can help designers select components and materials that have lower EIs. This will promote sustainable development practices by recognizing the projects that implement strategies for better environmental and health performance (LEED, 2014).
Traditionally, urban solid wastes are managed in a hierarchy that looks like an inverted pyramid. At the broad top is landfill, which is a macro solution applied at the level of the city. Very little of the waste is processed or treated in any way, and indeed have a maximum impact on the environment. At the narrow bottom of the inverted pyramid is waste minimization at source. This is a micro solution to waste management, applied at the level of an individual and household, or a business/industry at the place where the waste is generated. This research aims to focus on the concept of the “minimization at source" to reduce the amount of waste generated indeed to avoid situations where waste is generated. In order to reduce C&D waste, an integrated design technique is required because a large amount of waste can be generated due to the inappropriate design and unpredictable changes in the site (Poon et al., 2004). The BIM is considered as an effective concept to reduce the amount of waste by combining 2D and 3D factors, which are effective on the building design, with exogenous factors such as geographical location and local design conditions as a database. As a result, it can provide a unified resource for the entire information of the building (Poon et al., 2001). In the next phase, the life cycle of prevented waste is investigated to analyze the environmental impacts of waste and dissipated energy. Various LCA tools (i.e. ENVIST#, Sima pro#, ATHENA#, etc.) have been evaluated; eventually “ATHENA# Impact Estimator for Building” was selected as it has a powerful and complicated database that is prevalently used in North America and that it can evaluate all assemblies of a building based on the international LCA methodology, allowing users to modify the design, far-reaching access, supplanting materials and reporting various comparable figures and tables of EIs as the main merits of LCA tool
The authors elected to use Athena Impact Estimator# for Buildings because it has the Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) dataset of the North American construction industry and because it is designed to evaluate the whole building and its assemblies based on the internationally recognized life cycle assessment (LCA) methodology. When using Athena, the focus is on analyzing the embodied energy of the architectural, structural and facility systems that are used in the 3D conceptual design. This is an important step because LCA analysis outlines how the EIs of all products should be documented and communicated to the owner. Another reason of using Athena Impact Estimator is that it reports results for the environmental impact measures consistent with the US EPA TRACI methodology including global warming potential, acidification potential, human health particulate, ozone depletion potential, smog potential, and eutrophication potential, which is commonly used in the north America while the other tools are basically use various environmental impacts assessment methods that is more suitable for European countries. Athena additionally reports various resource uses such as primary energy and water, and emissions to air, water, and land. This is an important step because LCA analysis outlines how the EIs of all products should be documented and communicated to the owner. Hoff (2008) considers that ISO 14020 calls for the implementation of a standardized format for communicating product EIs, called Environmental Product Declaration (EPD). Therefore, LCA should be applied to integrated systems in a building by combining all the EPDs of every selected component in a single environmental impact assessment. The interoperability potential of this tool also makes it to be more capable to be linked with the BIM based tools. That LCA module is connected to an external database that stores the extracted quantities of materials, which is then imported into the Athena. This paper also describes a methodology of integrating LCA capabilities to support building design at all levels of development from very early conceptual model, instead of generating LCA results only when the fully detailed BIM-based model is ready and where design and material choices have been made. The broad system perspective makes LCA as a powerful tool for environmental comparison of different options for waste management of a specific product, a material, or a complex waste flow. Therefore, the LCA has been acknowledged as a tool for waste management planning and policy-making. It is now being used in various contexts, ranging from local planning to policy-making at national and international levels (Ekvall et al., 2007). In particular, the broad perspective of LCA makes it possible to take into account the significant environmental benefits that can be obtained through different waste management processes; for example, waste incineration with energy recovery declines the need for other energy sources, material from recycling processes replaces production of virgin material, biological treatment may reduce the need for production of artificial fertilizers and vehicle fuel residues from waste incineration may replace gravel at road constructions (Birgisdottir, 2004). This integrated system is going to be used to calculate and estimate the construction wastes, which come from architectural and structural design clashes with building mechanical, electrical and pipeline facilities. These results will be compared with the real waste calculation in conventional construction methods, and the environmental impacts will be represented for both methods. The successful implementation of such a methodology represents a significant advancement in the ability to attain sustainable design of a building during the early stages to evaluate its EIs. The contribution here is to use an integrated BIM-LCA interface to estimate and calculate EIs of the wastes, which are generated from design clashes and enable design team to modify design and to select optimal types of materials from early design stages of building projects.
The data available in different cities (Table 2) indicate that significant amount of C&D wastes is generated during construction activities in different regions of the world (varied from 18 kg capita/year to 842 kg capita/year). Furthermore, the quantity of C&D wastes can be predicted to continually increase (with the C&W generation of 16.2 million ty-1 which means 1.77 t m2 or 3.62 kg capita/year, which is owing to the rapid sustainable urbanization (Management, 2014).
The C&D waste management is an emerging field in construction industry to reduce the negative impacts of construction activities on the environment, which is considered as one of the key factors of successful sustainable development (Lu & Yuan, 2011). Although many studies have been conducted to improve C&D waste management, there are still many limitations in this area to be resolved.
Average management unit cost of components of C&D waste (Ibrahim, 2016).
Material type
Flat fee ($)
Variable fee ($/ton)
Concrete/Masonry/Asphalt
C&D waste generation in different countries/regions (Management, 2014).
Country/Region
C&D waste generation (kg/capita.year)
