Modelling information flow during the conceptual and schematic stages of building design
To cite this article: A.N. BALDWIN , S.A. AUSTIN , T.M. HASSAN & A. THORPE (1999) Modelling information flow during the conceptual and schematic stages of building design, Construction Management & Economics, 17: 2, 155-167, DOI: 10.1080/014461999371655
To link to this article:
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
Construction Management and Economics (1999) 17, 155± 167
Modelling information ¯ ow during the conceptual and schematic stages of building design
Department of Civil Engineering, Loughborough University, Loughborough, Leicestershire LE11 3TU, UK
Received 8 July 1996; accepted 16 January 1998
This paper reports on recent research the aim of which was to study, model and simulate the information ¯ ow at the conceptual and schematic stages of building design. The development of a generic model of the conceptual and schematic design process for buildings is described. This model comprising design tasks and their information requirements was produced using data ¯ ow diagrams. Examples from several levels of the model are provided. Details are then given as to how the model may be used to assist the management of the design process both directly and by providing primary data for other tools and techniques. Industry feedback on the data modelling and these tools and techniques is then discussed. It is concluded that it is only by a better understanding of the ¯ ow of information among project participants that the management of design may be improved, and that although the generic data ¯ ow model provides immediate bene® ts to design managers these can be enhanced greatly by the use of the model as a primary data source for other tools and techniques including the design structure matrix and simulation.
Conceptual and schematic design, information ¯ ow, data ¯ ow diagrams, design structure matrix,
Introduction
In the highly competitive construction market, designers and contractors must respond swiftly and ef® ciently to clients’ requirements and provide a building that meets agreed standards and satis® es cost and time constraints. Ef® cient management of the design process is imperative to ensure that the clients’ requirements will be met before starting construction. Interference in the construction process resulting from design changes or the late supply of information to the construction team is costly. Non-existent or ineffective design management results in extended design timescales. It may also produce con¯ icting construction details that result in delays and problems during construction (McGee, 1992).
The research described in this paper focuses on the design of buildings. We are interested in design at a contextual level, as a process that requires speci® c inputs to produce a set of agreed outputs.
0144± 6193  1999 E & FN Spon
building design as `a process which maps an explicit set of client and end-user requirements to produce, based on knowledge and experience, a set of documents that describe and justify a project which would satisfy these requirements plus other statutory and implicit requirements imposed by the domain and/or the environment’ (Hassan, 1996). This de® nition recognizes the pre-requisite inputs and outputs of design. It requires consideration of the interfaces of design, i.e. the transfer of design information between the participants involved. It is not concerned primarily with the thought process of the designer or the manner in which speci® c design tasks are executed. Attention is focused on the exchange of information, the `fuel of design’, necessary for members of the design team to complete their tasks. Although it is recognized that this exchange of information is only one aspect of the management of the design process, the writers consider the management of this information exchange to be critical.
The construction industry has increasingly come to recognize the need for more effective information transfer between participating organizations and internally, among the personnel within organizations (Ndekugri et al., 1988, Gray et al., 1994; Newton, 1995). Methodologies developed by the software industry for systems analysis and design purposes have proved valuable in the study of information ¯ ow within construction organizations. Several of these are based on the use of data ¯ ow diagrams (DFDs) which map the information ¯ ow in a system and record its transformation and coordination (Fisher, 1990; Austin et al., 1994, 1996a). This modelling approach is different from many other descriptive and prescriptive models of the design process (e.g. RIBA, 1973; Cross, 1984; Pahl and Beitz, 1988; Powell and Newland, 1993; Dias and Blockley, 1994) in that these address the different stages of design and their associated activities, but not the information exchange between activities.
This paper reports on recent research the aim of which was to study, model and simulate the information ¯ ow at the conceptual and schematic stages of building design. The objectives of the research were to de® ne and analyse the information exchange processes between design, construction and client personnel and to investigate new tools and techniques for planning and scheduling design activities. The basis of this research and the development of these techniques is a generic model of the conceptual and schematic design process for buildings. The development, veri® cation and validation of this model are described in this paper. This is followed by an outline of how data from the model may be used to simulate the information ¯ ow processes dynamically to identify critical data, mistiming of data, and the impact of design changes. A detailed discussion of the simulation work is given elsewhere (Baldwin et al., 1998). Industry feedback on the model and the planning tools and techniques produced is presented also.
Introduction
The design of a commercial, industrial or other complex building is a multi-disciplinary task requiring input from architects, civil and structural engineers, and building services engineers. To manage the design process effectively it is necessary for the design manager to be sympathetic to the designers’ ambitions and method of work, while establishing a framework within which the tasks and objectives are kept in focus as the design moves through its stages of development (Gray et al., 1994). Irrespective of whether the designers are employed by one or several organizations, some form of information management is required to ensure that the participants within the design process meet their commitments in an ef® cient manner. Information inputs must be scheduled to meet the requirements of each member of the design team. Deliverables must do so within a time scale and at a cost acceptable to the client and all related parties. Information needs to be exchanged in a timely and effective manner. It is the ef® cient and effective management of this information ¯ ow and the resources required to produce the design deliverables, (drawings, speci® cations, calculations, reports etc.) that we consider essential to improved design management: in particular the interfaces between members of the design team (including the client).
The importance of improved design management is now widely recognized. A report by NEDC showed that more than 50% of problems on building sites were related to poor design information (NEDC, 1987). Frequently these problems were found to be more signi® cant than those attributed to poor workmanship and site management. With the costs in Europe of rectifying building failures running at 12± 15% of total construction expenditure (Cornick, 1991), the rewards for improving the management of design information are great. The British Standard, BS7000: Guide To Managing Design In Construction (BSI, 1994), recognizes both the importance of the task and the procedures involved.
In the building industry design management traditionally has been the task of the architect, because this profession was ® rst involved with the production of the design brief, and thereafter became involved in the selection of the other design organizations (e.g. structural and building services engineers). It is still normal for the architect to have the lead role in both the design and the management of the design at the conceptual and schematic design stages. All the projects studied within our research were architect led. No attempt was made to widen the research to include projects designed under other forms of procurement, partly because all those interviewed considered the design information requirements to be the same irrespective of the form of procurement.
Previous construction related design research, (see, e.g. Topalian, 1979; Ahuja, 1984; Bennett et al., 1988; Gray et al., 1994; Price, 1995) has identi® ed many of the problems of building design management. An early part of the research involved a survey and interviews with twenty construction industry professionals to investigate current practice in building design management and its associated problems (Hassan, 1996). These professionals, who included architects, structural engineers, and building services and other design staff, identi® ed some of their main problems in design management as being due to: (i) the inherent nature of design in particularly its iterative nature, (ii) acquiring technical information; (iii) client changes; (iv) dif® culties in managing information (such as the problem of missing information); and (v) dif® culties in planning and scheduling design work. Of these categories the last two were considered by the industry representatives interviewed to be of particular signi® cance and within their sphere of in¯ uence. These formed the focus of our research. These two categories are directly linked and this focused the attention of the research team on information transfer, communication issues and interfaces, and the development of tools and techniques to assist those involved in the management of the design process. Design is, by its nature, an iterative process, and it is this aspect that makes it complex and dif® cult to manage. Current planning techniques such as network analysis and PERT are suitable for planning activities which are either sequential or parallel, but cannot be used to plan iterative activities (such as design) because they do not allow feedback loops. Hence the need for new tools and techniques.
The survey and interviews highlighted some problematical information related events, including: starting a design task earlier than anticipated based upon assumed information; gate keeping (or withholding of design information) among design team members; predicting the impact of changes in design information; assessing the result of missing information; evaluating the variation in the quality of information exchanged between different design tasks; and releasing the information from different design tasks in packages or phases. By understanding and making allowance for such events it should be possible to improve the management of information ¯ ow, and hence the prospect of completing designs to the time schedule required by the construction team. Clearly, any solution of these dif® culties requires some model of the design process and the information ¯ ow therein.
Modelling the building design process
Design process models re¯ ect the focus of their researchers. Some are descriptive, describing sequences of activities that typically occur (e.g. French, 1985). These models re¯ ect the solution focused nature of design thinking, showing the process by which design decisions are reached. Others are prescriptive, in an attempt to persuade or encourage designers to adopt improved ways of working (e.g. Cross, 1991). The models of Frost (1992) and Powell and Newland (1993) concentrate on the human and behavioural aspects of designers. The `blackbox’ approach of Addis (1990), concentrates on the inputs and outputs of the design process rather than the process itself. Dias and Blockley (1994) have produced integrated product and process models for design through the de® nition of generic units called `roles’. These allow both functions and responsibilities of designers to be identi® ed.
The building design process is a multi-disciplinary process, performed in a series of iterative steps to conceive, describe and justify increasingly detailed solutions to meet the needs of the client. This may be considered to commence with the initial inception of the development and to end when construction is complete. There is no universally accepted model of the building design process. The most commonly recognized and accepted prescriptive model for a building project in the UK is the RIBA Plan of Work (RIBA, 1973). This is a framework of stages from A to M describing all the design work and management tasks within a project programme from inception to completion. The three main stages of design formalized by RIBA are: stage C (outline proposals); stage D (scheme design); and stage E (detail design). These stages overlap with the earlier stage B (feasibility), and the later stage F (production information).
However, this model, widely used and accepted, is deceptive in that the boundaries between the stages are frequently more `fuzzy’ than it implies. Also, different forms of procurement and client requirements often lead to the early stages being combined and to variations in the model. BAA plc, a major client of building and construction work in the UK, has developed its own building process model with the intent to clarify and detail all the stages of design, construction, and operation relating to its types of projects.
Modelling the building design process currently is attracting particular attention from researchers because of the need to explore relationships between organizations, study and improve business processes, and benchmark best practice. The approaches adopted include traditional work study methods, process control methods, simulation, and business modelling techniques.
Modelling the overall design process is a hugely complex task. Partial models identifying the detail required by speci® c user groups are better suited to research purposes. The authors consider existing models of the building design process inadequate for the purposes of understanding information related events and planning and scheduling design tasks, as they do not address the interrelationship of design activities and the information ¯ ow between design activities. We argue that it is only by taking these factors into consideration that it will be possible for the design manager to improve the planning and scheduling of design tasks signi® cantly.
Due to the popularity of the RIBA Plan of Work and its universal familiarity the research team decided within the context of this research to consider the design process as consisting of the three main RIBA stages, C, D, and E. However, it is noted that, in practical terms, design professionals commonly are more comfortable with the term, `concept design’, in lieu of `outline proposals’ for stage C and the term `schematic’ as common as `scheme design’ for stage D. The research described in this paper focuses on a data ¯ ow model for the concept and schematic stages of design. The development of similar models for detail design is described in Austin et al. (1995, 1996a,b).
Development of a conceptual and schematic data ¯ ow model
The information requirements at the conceptual and schematic design stages were investigated by monitoring design at the conceptual and schematic stages on three large building projects. This involved the observation of the design process, attendance at regular design meetings and interviews with architects, structural engineers, mechanical and electrical engineers, civil engineers and other specialist design staff. The production of the model was an iterative process. The initial version was produced on the basis of three case studies. The model was veri® ed against each of these situations, and then validated by interviews with other architects and engineers from ten different design organizations. The conceptual design stage of a major building project was then `shadowed’ to test the model and the ® ndings presented during a seminar attended by senior design managers. Table 1 outlines the types of project investigated.
The ® rst case study (A) was an historical study of a completed project. This comprised an initial study from the project documentation, which included: geotechnical reports; environmental statement; scope of work document; progress reports; minutes of meetings; programmes; quality records; team responsibilities; a history of events affecting the design programme; and the preliminary design document. Some of the information needed had to be obtained from members of the design team. This was collated by interviews with key team members. From these data the information ¯ ow model was constructed and demonstrated to members of the team who veri® ed the model after requesting some minor re® nements.
This initial study provided two important ® ndings. First, it con® rmed that data ¯ ow diagrams were a suitable technique for information transfer representation (see below). They enabled the research team to identify the key information ¯ ows, and this was understood readily by all the personnel involved in reviewing the project. Second, building data ¯ ow models from completed projects does not always reveal how and when information is transferred and does not show which design tasks are suspended waiting on information from other tasks. This can be obtained only from shadowing `live’ projects.
The subsequent case studies (B,C) were on live projects. In each case, following an initial interview with the project manager, the researcher attended weekly design meetings and acted as an observer/ recorder. This provided direct experience of all the discussions, issues raised, information required, and information issued by designers representing the different disciplines. No other interaction with the members of the design team took place. This decision was taken so as not to cause any disruption to the design team, as the design programmes were very tight. For the same reason, no interviews were conducted with members of the design team during the design phase. However, interviews, where appropriate, were conducted after the completion of the design work.
In addition to observed and recorded information from the weekly design meetings, other sources of
Table 1	The types of project investigated



Design and build

Engineering complex
Design and build
information used by the research team were: the scheme design report; the programmes for the design and construction work; and written instructions from the client. In none of the three case studies involved in the development of the model was it possible to interview client representatives on a regular basis. Within the model produced there are no speci® c tasks
which are the responsibility of the client. Tasks requiring input from the client are identi® ed as `seeking information’.
A variety of techniques exist for modelling data ¯ ow (Marca and McGowan, 1988; Martin and McClure, 1985). This research used data ¯ ow diagrams (DFDs) to model the design tasks and information exchange between them. The DFD methodology was selected because of its simplicity of use and the fact that the components can be translated to the relevant elements in the design process. The components of DFDs and our interpretation in the design context are shown in Figure 1. The processes represent design tasks, the data ¯ ows information exchange and the data stores standards, speci® cations or design ® les. Data sources or sinks are used to represent external entities or organizations such as the client, the contractors or local authorities. Further justi® cation of the choice of DFDs over other techniques is given elsewhere (Gharib, 1991; Austin et al., 1996b; Hassan, 1996).
Data ¯ ow diagrams are drawn in a hierarchical form. The top level, known as the `context diagram’ simply states the overall process. The context diagram was subdivided and the processes further decomposed until the decomposition identi® ed the tasks that produced speci® c information requirements. In DFDs these bottom level tasks are known as `functional primitive tasks’ (FPTs). The level of detail within the FPTs was determined by the researcher in consultation with the industry representatives. No predetermined level of detail exists. FPTs represent speci® c tasks which the designer must complete for either the conceptual design report or the scheme design report to be completed. Although they represent design output they may not be separate design deliverables, i.e. calculations, drawings, sketches, etc. In our model, examples of functional primitive tasks include: estimate super-
structure costs; calculate the approximate size of structural members; and decide ® nishes and materials.
The hierarchy and structure of the model are shown in Figure 2. The model comprises six levels of detail from the context diagram (level 0). The model is divided into two main sections, one for concept design and the other for scheme design. It was found inappropriate to produce two separate models to cover these two stages of design, as invariably there was an overlap in the information requirements at the two stages.
Examples from several levels of the model are shown in Figures 3± 7. Figure 3 (level 1) illustrates how the main model is divided into two main subsections, concept design and scheme design. Figure 4 (level 2, concept design) shows the main processes: building concept; site investigation; site planning; drainage concept design, and production of the concept design report. All output focuses on this main deliverable. Figure 5 (level 3) shows the building concept design divided into the three main processes: architectural concept design; the structural concept design; and services concept design. Figure 6 (level 4) expands the structural concept design into its three main components, foundations, superstructure, and ¯ oor slab. The superstructure design is then expanded in Figure 7 (level 5), showing the detail at the lowest level of the model. Here all the processes shown are functional primitive tasks. In total the model has 50 functional primitive tasks and 423 information ¯ ows. (For reasons of clarity not all of the functional primitive tasks have been shown within these ® gures).
A computer aided software engineering (CASE) tool was used to draw and amend the DFDs. In our research the CASE tool was used continually to draw the data ¯ ow diagrams, identify the components, and analyse and amend the model. Various reports were
then produced by the CASE tool to help verify the model, including lists of all the model components (processes, information ¯ ows, data stores and data sources or sinks), the breakdown of the data ¯ ows into data elements, and the process inputs and outputs.
Further details on the use of data ¯ ow diagrams for systems analysis may be found in Demarco (1978), Ward and Mellor (1986). The use of data ¯ ow diagrams for construction research is also described by
Pollard and Plume (1993) and Fisher and Lin (1992).
Application of the conceptual and schematic design data ¯ ow model
Using the model on its own
The design managers interviewed con® rmed the generic conceptual and schematic design data ¯ ow model to be a useful monitoring tool to ensure the
Figure 2	Structure of the generic data ¯ ow model for the conceptual and schematic design stages
completeness of information requirements for each design task. It provides a useful map of the overall process. Some design staff interviewed were content to use the data ¯ ow diagrams as an aide memoire in their normal form. Others stated a preference for the information within the model to be presented in alternative forms, e.g. checklists or as a matrix of responsibilities. Although the model was validated as a `generic’ model, it was accepted that on each project there would need to be an early review of the model to check that all the processes were relevant and the terminology was appropriate for the parties concerned. This was identi® ed as a positive aspect of the model in that it helped the project team focus on the processes involved in the project from the earliest stages. The generic data ¯ ow model was found to provide immediate bene® ts to design managers. However, these can be enhanced greatly by the use of the model as a
primary data source for other tools and techniques.
Application to analysis by the design structure matrix
Existing tools and techniques used for project planning purposes such as bar charts and network analysis do not accommodate iterative tasks. The DFDs within the conceptual and schematic design model do not on their own identify loops of iterative design tasks clearly. One method of doing this is to apply the partitioning techniques of the design structure matrix (DSM), developed originally by Steward (1981). This method is well suited to analysing information ¯ ows in design in order to identify an optimum sequence of tasks and the clusters of interdependent design activities. In the matrix, design tasks are organized ® rst in any order as matrix rows and columns. Any dependence between tasks is identi® ed by a mark in the relevant cell (Figure 8). If the mark exists under the diagonal of the matrix then the task provides input to a subsequent task. If the mark exists above the diagonal this indicates that the task provides input to an earlier task; such feedback dependence may be due to the poor ordering of the task or an unavoidable iteration in the logic of the design process.
By using partitioning algorithms, the tasks within the matrix can be reorganized to identify the optimum sequence of consecutive and iterative tasks, the latter clearly identi® able as blocks of tasks with marks above the diagonal (Figure 9.) The DSM can be used to: identify interdependent design tasks; optimize the order of design tasks; identify natural groupings of tasks; identify important interfaces between groupings of tasks; and analyse and explain the effects of changing the order of design tasks. (Austin et al., 1995, 1996b).
Figure 3	The conceptual and schematic data ¯ ow model: level 1, concept and scheme design
Although this can take account of only foreseeable dependence, the authors believe that the use of DSM focuses attention on the closely coupled blocks of tasks that require careful management, and as such reduces the likelihood of any lack of information disrupting the design work.
Simulating the design process
The generic data ¯ ow model and the design structure matrix provide the design manager with tools to analyse the design process and assess the impact of design changes. However, these techniques do not permit an assessment of the impact of events such as missing information, commencing a design task at an early time based on assumed information, and the other design management problems previously identi® ed. As they stand, neither technique includes the allocation of resources or durations to each design task to produce a design schedule and assessment of resource utilization for the whole design process. This may be achieved by simulation.
The objective of developing a simulation model was to transform the generic data ¯ ow models from a static state to a dynamic state. After investigating the options for simulating the design process, a three-phase (see Tocher, 1963; Pidd, 1992) discrete event simulation approach was selected as the most appropriate simulation environment. Discrete event simulation allows
Figure 5	The conceptual and schematic data ¯ ow model: abstract from level 3, the three processes of building concept
the user to interact with the model and to observe instantaneously the changes that occur in the model as the simulation clock advances, and typical events involved in this approach are well suited to representing design activities. The simulation software chosen provided ¯ exibility in the modelling, with the possibility of incorporating conditional rules to execute the required actions when running the model. A more detailed discussion of the choice of technique and operation of the software is given elsewhere (Baldwin et al., 1995, 1998; Hassan, 1996).
The relationship between the data ¯ ow model, the design structure matrix and the simulation model is shown in Figure 10. The data within the simulation model include the functional primitive tasks from the data ¯ ow model plus additional information such as task durations, resource requirements, data identifying the nature of the design tasks (e.g. iterative or noniterative) and the information links between them. For each link speci® c attributes are identi® ed, representing the information related events that have been identi-
® ed prior to the start of the simulation. These data are stored in tables which are combined when the simulation is run. The tables also make provision for information that will be generated as the simulation proceeds, e.g. the start and ® nish times of every task, and the status of every task: ready to start; completed ® rst iteration; and completed. The user has the choice to run the model in either deterministic or stochastic mode (the latter by sampling from a normal distribution).
The results of the simulation displayed to the user include: a bar chart showing the start and end of every task and every iteration; icons showing the change of state of every task and resource as the simulation clock advances; and a resource histogram showing the levels of each resource (designer, draftsmen, etc.) required. These results allow the design manager both to track the status of the design tasks and resources as the simulation progresses and also to obtain ® nal schedules which may be used to monitor progress and control resources.
Throughout the research period close contact was maintained with architects and design engineers to gain feedback on the generic model and the tools and techniques developed. This feedback is reviewed under three sub-headings describing the important features (from the viewpoint of modelling) of conceptual and schematic design, the data ¯ ow model, and the tools and techniques developed.
Features of the conceptual and schematic stages of design
Important features/characteristics of the conceptual and schematic stages of design identi® ed during the production of the model include the following.
(i) The model for the conceptual and schematic stages of design is independent of the procurement strategy. It shows the information requirements to complete design tasks not when these tasks are completed and by whom.
(ii) The schematic design stage is more dif® cult to manage than the detailed design stage, from the viewpoint of change. Changes at the schematic design stage tend to be more frequent and have a greater overall impact on the design than those at the detailed design stage.
(iii) There is no distinct pattern with respect to the dif® cult design tasks or the dif® cult sources of information. These vary from project to project.
(iv) The dif® culty in obtaining information for tasks varied.
(v) The interviews identi® ed all technical design information as important. Information such as the approved programme and approved cost plan were often seen as less important.
(vi) External information sources (e.g. different authorities, insurers, etc.) presented dif® culties because of the time taken by them to take decisions or provide approvals. There was frequently a dif® culty in the interpretation of regulations.
Such information sources often were the cause of redesign work.
(vii) There is no formal way to judge the quality of information exchanged. The measure of information quality varies according to the sender and the recipient of the information. Missing information or information of insuf® cient quality from the recipients point of view is normally supplemented by assumptions on the part of the recipient.
Figure 8 Example of a matrix showing task relationships before partitioning
Figure 9	Example of a partitioned matrix showing coupled tasks/loops
The generic data ¯ ow model was the subject of numerous review meetings. These meetings resulted in re® nements and suggestions which were incorporated into the model. The model also was validated against the actual design process during a case study of a major building project. The data collected included notes and observations recorded when `shadowing’ the design meetings. The information exchanged was recorded and then categorized within different headings and allocated to at least one of the information ¯ ows on the model. This con® rmed that the model represented the design process subject to minor adjustments due to this speci® c nature of each project.
The generic data ¯ ow model was developed through several iterations. When validating the model, changes to initial versions of the model required amendments to some 30% of the information ¯ ows and some 10% of the tasks. This level of amendment quickly reduced to some 15% of the information ¯ ows and some 5% of the tasks. When using the generic model on a new project some changes to the model are inevitable to ensure that the model fully represents the individual project. This initial review of the model is seen as bene® cial to the overall design process in that it requires the design manager consciously to consider all the tasks and information ¯ ows that may be required. Feedback from industry showed such a review to be bene® cial and the levels of changes required were not considered onerous. Most of these changes were additions to the model for the clari® cation of project speci® c issues.
Figure 10 Relationship between the DFD model; the DSM model and the simulation model
A few tasks and information requirements were regarded by some interviewees as part of later stages of design. This is partly due to the natural overlap between the different stages of design and partly due to the lack of consensus among researchers and professionals in the construction industry as to the tasks that comprise each stage of design. However, to maintain the generic nature of the model, it was decided to retain these elements so that they may be used at the discretion of different user organizations. The feedback from industry highlighted the need for a better understanding of the conceptual and schematic stages of design and con® rmed the contribution that this type of research provides to industry.
The industry representatives reviewed the DSM and simulation tools with interest and con® rmed the technical and operational feasibility of using such tools to
Suitability of
the tools to
Assessing the impact of missing information
Assessing the impact of assuming information
Assessing the impact of the phased release of information
Assessing the impact of different levels of information quality
Assessing the impact of gatekeeping of information
Assessing the impact of uncertainties
Assessing the impact of resource management
Table 2	Feedback from industry representatives
model the conceptual and schematic design phases. No economic evaluation or economic feasibility study was undertaken.
The DSM showed clearly the iterative tasks and was particularly useful in examining the impact of changes in task order due to client changes. Also of interest were the interfaces between groups of iterative tasks. These interfaces highlighted the information that needed to be provided before another part of the design work could begin. They focused design managers attention on the points in the design process where `® xity’ was essential to avoid design changes and abortive work.
The simulation model has been validated at a preliminary level through demonstrations to industry professionals using sample data in scenarios designed to replicate real situations identi® ed in the earlier interviews. These included assessing the impact of: missing information; assuming information; the phased release of information; different levels of information quality; the gatekeeping of information; the impact of uncertainties; and the problems of resource management. The scenarios were explained and the industry representatives asked to rate the importance of the events within the conceptual and schematic stages of design together with the suitability of the tools to provide the solution. The results are shown in Table 2, which shows the relative importance of the events identi® ed and con® rms the suitability of the tools produced to analyse the problems. In all the scenarios demonstrated, the simulation was thought to be well suited to assisting the design manager in examining, scheduling and resolving issues, and identifying the effects of speci® c events.
However, it was agreed that there are no substantial bene® ts from running the simulation model solely to produce design schedules only for the conceptual design stage, because at this stage of the design process architects usually `think’ of more than one task simultaneously. This aspect is very dif® cult to simulate, and allocating realistic durations to these tasks is problematical. At the conceptual design stage, a signi® cant amount of time is spent `thinking’ around the design problem. This may vary according to the designer’s experience and background and according to the project’s particular circumstances. There is often a substantial amount of time spent waiting for the client to make decisions or provide information, which in turn depends on the type of client and/or the type of project; hence simulation would give unrealistic results. All the resources involved at this stage are small and hence there are no substantial bene® ts from simulating resources engagement or utilization. As the design progresses simulation offers real bene® ts to the design manager. Problems such as changes in design information, missing design information, gatekeeping of design information and variations in the quality of information exchanged during the design process become more readily apparent as the design progresses. All such problems may be investigated and evaluated using simulation. However, it is concluded that only in the schematic and detailed phases of design are techniques such as simulation truly feasible within a design environment.
The importance of improved design management is now widely recognized. The survey and interviews undertaken within this research con® rmed that the management of the conceptual and schematic stages of design are particularly dif® cult. These phases represent the `front end’ of the detailed design stage, and problems in managing the early stages will affect the whole design process. Decisions made at this early stage of design also have a major in¯ uence on the overall project cost. Dif® culties in managing information ¯ ow and dif® culties in planning and scheduling design work are particular problems for the design manager.
It is only by a better understanding of the ¯ ow of information among project participants that the management of design may be improved. There is considerable research focus at present on process models of the design and construction process. The research described in this paper complements such studies. We have argued that existing models of the design process are inadequate if we are to obtain a detailed understanding of information related events. The generic conceptual and schematic data ¯ ow model produced as part of this research programme provides design managers with a basis for monitoring the production of design information. When data from the model are used with other tools and techniques a more detailed analysis of problems such as missing information, the phased release of information, uncertainty and other scenarios of information exchange may be assessed. However, the potential of techniques such as discrete event simulation to model the building design process, particularly the conceptual design stage, is restricted because of the inherent nature of this stage of the design process.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the contribution to this research programme by AMEC Design and Management and Ove Arup and Partners. The research described in this paper was funded by the EPSRC through their project reference GR/H77705.
