Factors constraining successful building project implementation in South Africa
To cite this article: Jasper Mbachu & Raymond Nkado (2007) Factors constraining successful building project implementation in South Africa, Construction Management and Economics, 25: 1, 39-54, DOI: 10.1080/01446190600601297
To link to this article:
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
Construction Management and Economics (January 2007) 25, 39–54
Factors constraining successful building project implementation in South Africa
JASPER MBACHU* and RAYMOND NKADO
Faculty of Engineering and the Built Environment, University of the Witwatersrand, PO Box 20, Wits 2050, South Africa
Received 25 August 2004; accepted 9 January 2006
The prevalence of client dissatisfaction in the South African building industry is a consequence of nonachievement of set project objectives due to identifiable constraints. The paper presents the results of investigations into the nature, magnitudes and frequencies of occurrence of these constraints. The descriptive survey method was used with qualitative data gathering through semi-structured interviews, and quantitative data gathering using structured questionnaires. Multi-attribute methods and rank correlation tests were used in the data analyses. A set of consultants’ and contractors’ acts of omission or commission is shown as the most influential and most frequently occurring factor constraining successful project delivery in the South African building industry. The controllable factors account for 67% of the perceived discrepancies between expected and actual outcomes of project development. An Influence–Frequency matrix was developed and applied as a conceptual framework for establishing the risk levels of the identified project constraints. The application of this framework is recommended as an effective approach to risk analysis and risk response development in project management.
Introduction
How do companies compete, build and maintain viable businesses in a rapidly changing global marketplace and business environment? A major part of the answer is ‘a commitment to creating and retaining satisfied customers’ (Kotler, 1997, p.63).
To create and retain satisfied clients, service providers in the construction industry must meet the expectations and requirements of their clients in the delivery of projects. In terms of project development, clients’ expectation is chiefly the delivery of the project within time, quality and cost targets (Luder, 1986; Raftery, 1999; Nkado, 1991).
Nkado and Mbachu (2001) argue that if clients’ stated needs or developmental requirements could sufficiently address the real (which are usually latent) needs and objectives for investment, delivering the project within time, quality and cost targets could translate to clients’ satisfaction. However, achievement
of these project objectives proves to be elusive owing to some controllable and uncontrollable constraints. This is confirmed by the high incidence of client dissatisfaction reported in the literature (Kometa et al., 1994; Bowen et al., 1997; DPW, 1997).
The literature is replete with studies identifying factors constraining successful project implementation. For instance, NEDO (1978, 1983) and Kometa et al. (1994) argue that clients’ attributes in particular, and their general approach towards project management could exert significant impact upon the achievement of project objectives. Morris and Hough (1986), and Kometa et al. (1994) identify 10 ‘success’ factors, which should be present for any major project to be successfully executed. These include project definition and formulation, project finance, contracting, legal agreements, human factors, project implementation and management, politics and social factors, schedule and urgency, schedule duration and planning. How the client responds to these factors affects the performance of consultants and contractors in fulfilling the client’s
*Author for correspondence. j.i.mbachu@massey.ac.nz
objectives for the project.
Construction Management and Economics
ISSN 0144-6193 print/ISSN 1466-433X online # 2007 Taylor & Francis
Kwakye (1991) identifies the choice of procurement approach as a critical determinant of successful project execution. However, Turner (1990) reports that in practice, the traditional approach is followed in the great majority of cases, thus reflecting the reluctance of professionals and their clients to tread unfamiliar ground and incur the consequent risks. The insistence on the traditional approach to procurement due mainly to familiarity, even in situations where this type of approach cannot guarantee the realisation of clients’ objectives for the project may be a possible cause of unsatisfactory outcomes of the procurement process. In this context, Rowlinson (1999) questions the rationale for continued adoption of the traditional procurement approach by many organisations when it can be argued that ‘it leads to a lack of flexibility, a price to pay in terms of claims-conscious behaviour, the fallacy of cost certainty, and a release of control by the client organization’ (p.48).
Other constraints to successful project implementation include disputes and adversarial relations. Latham (1994) argues that a positive alliance between parties in the procurement process constitutes an indispensable link to a successful project. However, disputes do arise, and will continue as long as people fail to trust one another. Latham (1994) notes that the UK construction industry has become extremely adversarial and is paying the price, adding that, ‘… the construction environment has been degraded from one of a positive relationship between all members of the project team, to a contest consumed in fault finding and defensiveness, which results in litigation’ (p.87). Clearly, the prevalence of disputes among the parties will not augur well for the realisation of the project objectives. Perhaps it is in the light of this that Salisbury (1990) suggests that opposition should be nipped in the bud before it develops into full-blown dispute. In addition to the applications of alternative dispute resolution strategies such as adjudication, conciliation/mediation and arbitration, Latham (1994) suggests that the best solution is to avoid disputes; and that if procedures relating to procurement and tendering are improved, the causes of conflict will be reduced. Latham (1994) further posits that, ‘a major step would be the adoption of a contract document, which places emphasis on teamwork and partnership to solve problems’ (p.87).
Adversarial relations also exist between the main contractors and subcontractors which undermine onsite productivity, and ultimately jeopardise the realisation of project objectives. Millet et al. (2000) report that where good relationships existed between main contractors and subcontractors, problems were alleviated more effectively, and they were able to provide a more efficient service; the reverse of which was the case in soured relationships. Millet et al. (2000) list delayed and incorrect payments, traditional contractual arrangements, holding of retention monies, lack of trust, unfair treatments and not being praised for good works, as some of the factors given by subcontractors, which could sour relationships between the main and subcontractors.
Gaps in the literature on constraints to project implementation include the magnitudes of influence, frequencies of occurrence and extent of control of these constraints by clients and the project team. Mere identification of some of these constraints is not sufficient to guide clients and project teams in properly budgeting for, and responding to, the risks involved. This paper addresses the identified gaps. In so doing, it highlights the constraints that may be peculiar to the building industries of developing countries.
Since the investigation of the factors constraining successful project implementation is a subject matter embedded in the overarching theme of project risk management, the study focuses on risk identification and risk quantification stages to provide a conceptual framework for subsequent stages of risk response development.
The PMI (1996) defines project risk management to include ‘processes concerned with identifying, analysing, and responding to project risk’ (p.111). This definition appears to agree with other definitions of risk management. However, a more robust definition is provided by the Australian/New Zealand Standard 4360 (1999), which recognises risk management as ‘the term applied to a logical and systematic method of establishing the context, identifying, analyzing, evaluating, treating, monitoring and communicating risks associated with any activity, function or process in a way that will enable organizations to minimize losses and maximize opportunities’ (p.1). Project risks are underpinned by the nature and interactions of the factors constraining successful project implementation. In the study of these factors, it may be necessary to apply project risk management principles.
Project risk in context
Successful building project implementation in South Africa	41
‘Risk’ could be defined in a number of ways depending on the objectives. A generic definition is provided by the Concise Oxford Dictionary as ‘exposure to chance of injury or loss’. A holistic understanding of risk in the project management context requires three approaches to the concept of risk: an a priori (before-the-event) definition of project risk draws from a probabilistic perspective (Levin et al., 1982), which is essentially the chance that what is expected may not be realised. An a posteriori (after-the-event) definition of risk sees risk as the actual loss or injury suffered as a result of not meeting expected targets or objectives due to some controllable or uncontrollable circumstances. A more profound perspective on risk is provided by the PMI (1996) in its definition of project risk management as including maximising the results of positive events and minimising the consequences of adverse events. By focusing on the set project objectives, the PMI perspective is concerned not only with meeting set project objectives by minimising adverse events, but also with exceeding project objectives by maximising positive events. However, this study focuses on the a priori perspective on project risk, since it emphasises a preventive rather than a remedial approach.
The Project Management Institute (PMI) (1996) identifies four fundamental steps in project risk management, which could overlap and interact with each other and with the processes in the general management knowledge areas as well:
(a) Risk identification: determining which risks are likely to affect the project and documenting the characteristics of each.
(b) Risk quantification: evaluating risks and riskinteractions to assess the range of possible project outcomes.
(c) Risk response development: defining enhancement steps for opportunities and responses to threats.
(d) Risk response control: responding to changes inrisk over the course of the project.
This study draws on the above risk management process, but more specifically, focuses on the following:
Risk identification: Identification of internal (controllable) and external (uncontrollable) sources of project risks, and gathering information for evaluating the magnitudes of influence and probability of occurrence of the identified risk factors.
Risk quantification: Risk evaluation using the information obtained above involves computing the expected value of each risk event as the product of the magnitude of influence (depicted by the Influence Index, II) and the frequency of occurrence (depicted by the Frequency Index, FI). Both indexes are computed from mean values of expert-rated influence and frequencies respectively for each risk event, as shown in Table2 and Table3 below. This draws from the PMI (1996) concept of ‘expected monetary value’ as a tool for risk quantification. The concept is defined in the next section.
Risk response development and control: Establishing a procedure for risk management in the project implementation process. A conceptual framework is developed in the form of Influence–Frequency matrix for establishing the risk profile of any potential risk event. The concept is discussed in the following section.
The expected monetary value (EMV), as a tool for risk quantification, is defined by the PMI (1996) as a product of two numbers given in equation(1):
where X is ‘the risk event value—an estimate of the gain or loss that will be incurred if the risk event does occur’; p(X) is ‘the risk event probability—an estimate of the probability that a given risk event will occur’ (PMI, 1996, p.115).
The concept of EMV can be adapted to formulate a framework for establishing the risk profiles of project constraints on the basis of their risk values (depicted by Influence Index II values) and their probabilities of occurrence (depicted by Frequency Index FI values). Thus by plotting the FI and II values of a project constraint on an Influence–Frequency matrix, the risk level of a constraint on a 5-band risk spectrum could be established. Owing to the relatively small number of data points involved in the study (maximum of 40), the ordinal rating scale was not converted to interval scale using correspondence analysis. However, the 5-band risk spectrum is obtained by transcribing the 5-point ordinal scale to 5-band interval scale for the purpose of interpreting the II and FI values computed in the multi-attribute analyses. Table1 presents the 5-band scale.
The risk level of any constraint is established on the basis of its location on the cells of the Influence– Frequency matrix. This was intentionally made to maintain the ordinal nature of the data (i.e. opinions) as distinct from interval data (e.g. numerical values from records). This is based on ‘expert judgement’. For example, risk events could be described as having a high, medium or low probability of occurrence and a severe, moderate or limited impact (PMI, 1996). In the context of this study, the ‘expert judgement’ refers to the opinions of consultants and contractors as canvassed in the surveys. The 3-point rating scales of the PMI were expanded to 5-band rating scales for a more sensitive Influence–Frequency matrix (see Figure2) used in the study.
Table 1	Converting 5-point ordinal rating scale to 5-band interval scale
Frequency of occurrence
Very high (VH)

Very low (VL)
Somewhat risky (SR)
Table 2	Levels of in
fluence of constr
aints of project characte
Project characteristics	*Levels of influence	TR	II	*Remarks	Rank
Specified quality levels
Labour and materials shortages
Level of complexity/technology
Site characteristics
*Levels of influence (Remarks): see Table1. %5Percentage of total respondents (TR) rating each level of influence of a particular constraint. II5Influence Index (equation(2)) of a given constraint; Rank 15most influential constraint.
The study was limited to the views expressed by registered members of the Association of Construction Project Managers (ACPM), and the Master Builders Association (MBA) of South Africa. The ACPM and the MBA are the major formal associations for construction project managers and building contractors, respectively, in the South African building industry. Since members of these associations are at the forefront of project conception, planning, implementation and controls, their views are considered most useful in this study. However, the views of clients and other professionals were canvassed in complementary studies.
The descriptive survey method as used in this study is recommended in situations where achieving the research objectives demands the technique of observation (via interview schedules and questionnaires) as the principal means of collecting the research data (Leedy, 1997; Saunders et al., 1997; Zikmund, 1997). The method involved two stages of data gathering.
Table 3	Frequencies of occurrence of constraints of project characteristics (contractors’ perceptions)
Labour and material shortages
Specified quality levels
Level of complexity/technology
Site characteristics
*Frequencies of occurrence (Remarks): see Table1. %5Percentage of total respondents (TR) rating each level of influence of a particular constraint. FI5Frequency Index (equation(2)) of a given constraint; Rank 15most frequently occurring.
Successful building project implementation in South Africa	43
first stage non-standardised scheduled interviews were conducted with a convenience sample of 20 (10 from each group of) construction project managers and contractors in the South African major cities of Johannesburg and Port Elizabeth. The aim of the pilot interviews was to identify the relevant constructs defining the constraints on successful project delivery in the South African building industry.
Constructs generated at the pilot interview stage were used in designing questionnaires, which were pretested and distributed to all the members of the ACPM and MBA through a nationwide survey.
Using a 5-point rating scale, respondents were asked to rate the levels of influence and frequencies of occurrence of each identified constraint. The 5-point rating scales for the levels of influence and frequencies of occurrence are shown in Table1.
The multi-attribute analytical technique was used to analyse the ratings of the respondents with a view to establishing a representative or mean rating point for each group of respondents. The analysis draws from the multi-attribute utility approach of Chang and Ive (2002), and involves the computations of the Influence Index (II) and the Frequency Index (FI). The II and FI indicate, respectively, the level of influence and frequency of occurrence of each constraint within a subset of factors. In each computation, the total number of respondents (TR) rating each constraint was used to calculate the percentages of the number of respondents associating a particular rating point to each constraint as shown in equation(2):
II j5Influence Index for attribute j; Rpjk5Rating point k (ranging from 1–5); %Rjk5Percentage response to rating point k, for attribute j. The Frequency Index (FI) was computed in the same manner.
Rank correlation analyses
For the purpose of improving reliability and validity of the research findings, the opinions of project managers and contractors were compared with a view to establishing ‘multiple sources of evidence’ (Tan, 2002, p.63) or measuring internal consistency through the ‘equivalent-form method’ (Zikmund, 1997, p.341). The comparison involves matching the sets of ranks analysed from the responses of project managers and contractors on the attributes of dimensions being rated.
Both Cooper and Emory (1995) and Zikmund (1997) recommend the use of Spearman rank-order correlation as the appropriate statistical technique in situations involving the ordinal level of measurement and two related sample cases. Naoum (2003) also supports the use of Spearman correlation test where ‘the problem is to measure the amount and significance of a correlation between people’s rank on a number of issues’ (p.124). The Spearman rank-order correlation coefficient rho (r) is computed (Zikmund, 1997, p.649) using equation(3):
where di is the difference between the ranks given to the ith attribute by each group; n is the number of attributes being ranked.
In the test of significance of the computed value of Spearman rank correlation coefficient, the null hypothesis (H0) assumes that no significant correlation exists between the two sets of ranks of n attributes computed from the ratings of construction project managers and contractors. In statistical terms, this implies that the computed rho (r) is less than or equal to the critical rho (ra). In the study, an alternative hypothesis (HA) is chosen for one-tailed test, which assumes that a significant and positive correlation exists. At 5% level of significance, both H0 and HA could be stated as statistical hypotheses as follows:
Of the 81 registered members of ACPM surveyed, 31 responded before the cut-off date for receipt of responses. Twenty-eight of these responses were fully usable. This represents an effective response rate of 35%. The non-usable responses were from respondents whose demographic profiles indicated that they did not belong to the target population (i.e. registered ACPM members, as distinct from associate or graduate members).
Responses in respect of years of professional practice showed that 24 (86%) respondents had more than 10 years of professional practice. In terms of highest post-secondary qualification, 71% had first degrees as their highest academic attainment. None of the respondents had a status below the managerial position in their respective organisations (i.e. 80% were directors, while 20% were in the top management cadre).
Nearly all (95%) of the respondents belonged to other professional associations such as the South African Property Owners’ Association (SAPOA),
Association of South African Quantity Surveyors (ASAQS), Chartered Institute of Building (CIOB), and the South African Institute of Valuers (SAIV). The responses obtained, though not representative of these other associations, implied varied experiences over and above those of core construction project management consultants.
The demographic profiles of the contractors showed that 98% had more than 10 years of construction experience, and 90% of the respondents were directors. Higher National Diploma certificates were the highest academic qualifications of 60% of the contractors while 40% had university degrees. However, these contractors deal mainly in the residential and commercial building sector and less in civil works.
The above demographic profiles of the respondents accord sufficient quality to the responses received, and by implication, the reliability of the results and related deductions.
Factors constraining successful project delivery
The pilot interviews conducted with selected directors of client organisations, contractors and construction project managers as described in the Methodology, yielded seven groups of factors constraining successful project delivery in the South African building industry, from a content analysis of the most recurring mentions. These are further categorised as controllable and uncontrollable factors, depending on the extent to which they could be controlled by clients and project teams. The categories and their constituent factors are listed as follows:
((AA))	Controllable (internal) factors:
(1) Project characteristics;
(B(B))	Uncontrollable (external) factors:
Governmental/statutory controls.
Constructs underlying each factor were investigated. The outcomes were incorporated into the questionnaire. Respondents’ ratings of the magnitudes of influence and frequencies of occurrence of each construct were analysed as described in the Methodology. Table2 and Table3 present examples of the analyses of the responses of contractors on the levels of influence and frequencies of occurrence of the constraints underlying project characteristics.
Internal factors constraining successful project delivery
Table4 summarises the magnitudes and frequencies of occurrence of the identified internal (controllable) factors constraining successful project delivery, as analysed from the responses of construction project managers and contractors. For each set of analysis (responses of project managers or contractors), the Influence Index (II) and the Frequency Index (FI) computed for each attribute were used to locate the risk profile of the attribute on the Frequency-Influence matrix, as described in the Methodology. The remarks (‘Rem’) served to interpret the II and FI values of each attribute on the 5-point rating scales used for both dimensions.
In each subset of attributes, the Spearman rank correlation test was used to test the significance of the differences between the two sets of ranks (Ri and Rf) computed from the responses of construction project managers and contractors. The tests were conducted at 5% level of significance.
In terms of project characteristics, Table4 shows that construction project managers perceived the level of complexity or technology as the most influential factor constraining successful project implementation. On the other hand, contractors believed that the specified quality level is the most influential factor under this category. Though no significant correlation exists in their sets of ranks, both groups perceived that all underlying constraints under this category were ‘somewhat risky’.
For the factors under consultants’ and contractors’ acts of omission or commission, construction project managers rated the quality and attitude to service as the most influential factor. Again, there is a divergence of views, as contractors perceived speed and comprehensiveness of services as the most influential factor under this category. However, a significant consensus of opinions exists between both groups on the frequencies of occurrence of the factors under this group. Also, both groups agreed that the quality of, and attitude to, service is one of the most risky project constraints. This accords with the findings of Ward et al. (1991), Maister (1993) and Richardson (1996) that the quality of, and attitude to, service with which the industry fulfils the needs of clients could influence their judgement of the level of success.
Table 4	Magnitudes and frequencies of occurrence of the internal project constraints

Level of complexity/ technology
Site characteristics
Labour and material shortages
Spearman’s Rank Correlation Coeff, r (managers’ versus contr influences and occurrence frequencies)5

(NSC5Not significantly correlated at 5% alpha)
Consultants’ and contractors’ acts of omission or commission
Quality of service and attitudes
Speed & comprehensiveness of service provided
Technical and managerial competence
Poorly defined or understood roles &
Past project performance
Resource (human, equipment and material) availability and leverage
Fragmentation of services
(SC5Significantly correlated at 5% alpha)	NSC	SC
timing & frequency of changes
4 Financial capacity	3.82	H	3	3	SF	6	SR	3.38	Avg	5	2.64	SF	8	SR
5 Late payments for	3.73	H	5	2.91	SF	7	SR	3.56	H	4	2.79	SF	6	SR
works duly executed
6 Undue interferences with 3.73 H 5 2.55 O 10 NSR 3.38 Avg 5 2.64 SF 8 SR the project team’s job
7 Wrong choice of	3.55	H	7	2.91	SF	7	SR	3.38	Avg	5	2.71	SF	7	SR
9 Contractual obligations	3.36	Avg	9	3.45	F	3	SR	3.63	H	2	3.29	SF	1	SR
10 Past project experience &	3.36	Avg	9	3.09	SF	5	SR	3.38	Avg	5	2.57	O	10	NSR
11 Conflicts of
Successful building project implementation in South Africa	47
Lastly, both project managers and contractors agreed that under client organisational influences, poor scope definition, timing and frequency of changes or variations constitute the most influential project constraint. Overall, while both groups agreed on the relative frequencies of occurrence of the factors under this group, full consensus was not evident on the prioritisation of the magnitudes of influence of the sub-factors.
External factors constraining successful project delivery
Table5 summarises the magnitudes and frequencies of occurrence of the identified external (uncontrollable) factors constraining successful project delivery, as analysed from the responses of construction project managers and contractors. For each set of analysis (i.e. responses of project managers or contractors), the Influence Index (II) and the Frequency Index (FI) were computed for each attribute as was done for the internal factors.
Though no significant correlation exists in the sets of ranks computed from project managers and contractors ratings of the factors under socio-cultural subset of project constraints (Table5), both groups agreed that workers’ morale is the most influential factor capable of constraining successful implementation of projects.
Again, under unforeseen circumstances, while project managers perceived site accidents as the most influential factor capable of constraining the achievement of project targets, contractors on the other hand perceived the most influential factor to be inclement weather conditions. However, a consensus of opinions exists in the ranking of the relative frequencies of occurrence of the factors under this subset.
In the list of factors under economic and globalisation dynamics, project managers perceived the volatility of the exchange rate of the Rand with major currencies as the most influential factor, while contractors perceived the potential global energy crisis and the attendant inflation as the most influential constraint.
Under the government/statutory controls, both project managers and contractors agreed that political controls such as compliance with empowerment/affirmative actions, and other forms of business controls are the most influential project constraint.
The views of construction project managers diverged significantly from those of contractors on nearly all pair-wise comparisons of the ranks of levels of influence and frequencies of occurrence of the constituent constraints to project implementation. This finding has two worrying implications for industry and practice. First, as those who work together closely and are at the forefront of project conception, planning, implementation and control, a divergence in views between construction project managers and contractors could be indicative of perceptual gaps concerning critical issues affecting successful project delivery, and by implication, lack of synergy in working together as a team. Secondly and more disturbing, the divergence in opinions could be indicative of the inability of the two groups to arrive at a consensus in finding solutions to many problems of the industry, hence the persistence of poor service delivery in the industry as reflected in client dissatisfaction (Bowen et al., 1997; Nkado and Mbachu, 2001); misunderstanding, mistrust and adversarial relations (Salisbury, 1990; Latham, 1994); time and cost overruns (Luder, 1986); poor project performance (Kometa et al., 1994); client lack of confidence in the professionals and contractors (Rowlinson, 1999); and lack of understanding of the priorities and requirements of clients (Richardson, 1996).
Summary of the internal and external factors constraining project delivery
Table6 summarises the magnitudes and frequencies of occurrence of the major groupings of the internal and external factors constraining successful project delivery.
Respondents to the surveys were also asked to rate the relative percentage influence of each group of factors in contributing to the total discrepancies between the expected and actual delivered project outcomes, assuming the total discrepancies, in quantitative terms, were to be 100%. In addition to establishing quantitatively the percentage relative influences of the identified groups of project constraints, the respondents’ ratings in this respect served as consistency checks on the thoughtfulness or reliability of the responses. The averages of the respondents’ ratings of the relative magnitudes (‘Rel Mag’) are also presented in Table6.
Figure1 presents the graphical plots of the relative magnitudes of the major groups. The frequency– influence mapping of the factor groups is shown in Figure2.
Establishing the risk levels of the project constraints: influence–frequency mapping
From the locations of the project constraints on the Influence–Frequency matrix (Figure2), their risk levels could be deduced as follows:
(1) Consultants and contractors’ influences.


Workers’ morale to work
Cultural influences: working hours, attitude to work, beliefs, etc.
Health (e.g.
Spearman’s Rank Correlation Coeff, r (managers’ versus contractors’ rankings of the levels of influence and frequencies of occurrence):
(NSC5Not significantly correlated at 5% level of significance):

3 Outbreak of hostility/political 3.27 Avg 3 1.45 R 3 NR 2.44 L 3 1 R 3 NR instability
4 Epidemic (e.g. outbreak of	2.82	Avg	4	1.09	R	4	NR	2.5	L	2	1	R	3	NR
Spearman’s Rank Correlation Coeff, r (influences and frequencies):

Statutory (e.g. compliance with local authority regulations; statutory requirements: safety, health and environment; building regulations)
and process of change of
Spearman’s Rank Correlation Coeff, r:
Critical rho (r.05) (for n55)5	0.90	0.90 Result: (NSC5Not significantly correlated at 5% level of significance):
see Table1.
N Somewhat risky (SR):
(2)(3) Project characteristics;
(3)(4) Government/statutory controls;
(4)(5) Economic and globalisation dynamics. N Not so risky (NSR):
Table5 shows that a set of consultants’ and contractors’ acts of omission or commission is the most influential and most frequently occurring group of factors constraining successful project implementation in the South African building industry, from both project managers’ and contractors’ points of view. Consequently, this group of factors occupies the highest level of risk as shown in the Influence– Frequency matrix of Figure2. Table6 shows a consensus of opinions between both groups of respondents on the relative magnitudes of influence and frequencies of occurrence for all the identified groups of factors.
In quantitative terms, the controllable factors account for 67% of the discrepancies between expected and actual project outcomes. This shows that in any given project, if the client and the project team could proactively eliminate or minimise the identified factors under their control, there would be 33% chance of not meeting expected targets due to uncontrollable factors.
Table6 also shows that for construction project managers’ and contractors’ groups of responses, the rankings of the levels of influence of the constraints computed from the ratings on the 5-point scale tally with the corresponding ranks of the average percentage relative magnitudes of influence computed from similar ratings out of 100%. This implies some measure of consistency in the ratings, and by implication, the reliability of the responses. Both Cooper and Emory (1995) and Zikmund (1997) identify this alternative measure as the ‘equivalent-form’ method of checking internal consistency of a measuring instrument.
Strategy for addressing the identified project constraints
The influence–frequency mapping (see Figure2) of the major groups of identified project constraints provides a framework for addressing the constraints in real life project situations. By this strategy, resources should be allocated to ameliorating the constraints in line with their relative levels of risks listed above. Thus greatest resources should be assigned to tackling consultants’ and contractors’ influences with highest risk levels.
Within the consultants’ and contractors’ group of constraints, the critical constraints could be deduced as those which were perceived to be risky by both the consultants and the contractors. These are shown in Table4 to include quality of service and attitudes, speed and comprehensiveness of service, and technical and managerial competence.

This study has investigated the factors constraining successful project implementation in the South African building industry. Results showed that a set of consultants’ and contractors’ acts of omission or commission is the most influential and most frequently occurring group of factors constraining successful project implementation in the South African building industry. Top of the list of this group of factors are the quality of service and attitudes, and speed and comprehensiveness of service. The controllable factors, in order: consultants and contractors influences, client organisational influences and project characteristics, account for 67% of the perceived discrepancies between expected and actual project outcomes. The uncontrollable group of factors, in order: socio-cultural issues, government/statutory controls, economic and globalisation dynamics and unforeseen circumstances, have the potential to account for the remaining 33% of the discrepancies. It should be noted that these factors are not unique to South Africa. However, it could be deduced that due to socio-cultural influences, their levels of influence and frequencies of occurrence, and by implication, risk levels, could differ between countries.
Drawing on the project risk management principles of risk identification and quantification, a framework in the form of an Influence–Frequency matrix was devised for establishing the risk levels of the identified groups of project constraints. This framework is recommended as an effective risk response procedure for addressing the identified factors.
It should be noted that no significant concurrence of views was recorded in nearly all pair-wise comparisons of the ranks computed from the ratings of construction project managers and contractors on the relative levels of influence and frequencies of occurrence of the underlying factors in each group of project constraints. It is argued that the perceptual gap between these two groupings of service providers who work closely together and who are at the forefront of project


contractors’ actions
C Project characteristics
E Government/statutory controls
F Economic and globalisation dynamics
Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient, r (managers’ versus contractors’ ranks of levels of influence and frequencies of occurrence):
(SC5Significantly correlated at 5% alpha):
Rel Mag5Relative Magnitude (average of the respondents’ ratings of the relative percentage influence of each factor in contributing to the total discrepancies between the expected and actual delivered project outcomes, assuming the total discrepancies, in quantitative terms were to be 100%).
Rem5Remarks: Level of influence (on a 5-point rating scale) of a given factor as indicated by the Influence Index (II): see Table1.
Figure 1	Relative magnitudes of influence of project
conception and delivery could be responsible for the lack of synergy and inability to find common solutions to the many problems of the industry. Narrowing this perceptual gap could provide the needed panacea, and is worthy of further investigation.
Practical use of the findings
The findings of this study are generic and useful for industry-wide application. At individual project level, a flowchart (see Figure3) has been developed for use by project managers for a simplified application of the findings of the study to the identification and classification of project constraints, and evaluation of their risk levels. The flowchart complements the use of the Influence–Frequency chart (see Figure2).
Acknowledgement
The authors gratefully acknowledge the contributions of the members of the Association of Construction Project Managers and the Master Builders Association of South Africa to the success of this research, by participating in the interviews and questionnaire surveys. The helpful input of referees in refining this paper is also acknowledged.
Figure 2	Influence–Frequency mapping of project constraints
Successful building project implementation in South Africa	53
Figure 3	Process flowchart for the identification and risk level evaluation of project constraints
