An integrated regression analysis and time series model for construction tender price index forecasting
S. Thomas Ng , Sai On Cheung , Martin Skitmore & Toby C.Y. Wong
To cite this article: S. Thomas Ng , Sai On Cheung , Martin Skitmore & Toby C.Y. Wong (2004) An integrated regression analysis and time series model for construction tender price index forecasting, Construction Management and Economics, 22: 5, 483-493, DOI:
To link to this article:
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
Construction Management and Economics (June 2004) 22, 483–493
An integrated regression analysis and time series model for construction tender price index forecasting
S. THOMAS NG1*, SAI ON CHEUNG2, MARTIN SKITMORE3 and TOBY C.Y. WONG1
1Department of Civil Engineering, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong
2Department of Building and Construction, City University of Hong Kong, Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong
3School of Construction Management and Property, Queensland University of Technology, GPO Box 2434, Brisbane, Q4001, Australia
Received 4 December 2002; accepted 22 January 2004
Clients need to be informed in advance of their likely future financial commitments and cost implications as the design evolves. This requires the estimation of building cost based on historic cost data that is updated by a forecasted Tender Price Index (TPI), with the reliability of the estimates depending significantly on accurate projections being obtained of the TPI for the forthcoming quarters. In practice, the prediction of construction tender price index movement entails a judgemental projection of future market conditions, including inflation. Statistical techniques such as Regression Analysis (RA) and Time Series (TS) modelling provide a powerful means of improving predictive accuracy when used individually. An integrated RA-TS model is developed and its predictive power compared with the individual RA or TS models. The accuracy of the RA-TS model is shown to outperform the individual RA and TS models in both one and two-period forecasts, with the integrated RA-TS model accurately predicting (95% confidence level) one-quarter forecasts for all the 34 holdout periods involved, with only one period not meeting the confidence limit for two-quarter forecasts.
Cost estimate, integrated forecasting model, tender price index forecast, time series modelling, regression analysis
Introduction
The majority of contracts for construction work are let by competitive tender when the design is sufficiently advanced for tenders to be compiled. Prior to this, reasonably accurate predictions of the likely tender prices have to be made, as clients need to be informed in advance of their likely future financial commitments and cost implications as the design evolves. This requires the estimation of building cost based on historic cost data that is updated by a forecasted Tender Price Index (TPI) (Tysoe, 1981; Smith, 1995), with the reliability of the estimates depending significantly on accurate projections being obtained of the TPI for the forthcoming quarters (Fitzgerald and Akintoye, 1995) – the degree of
*Author for correspondence. tstng@hkucc.hku.hk
accuracy of the projections being determined by their use and form, time horizon and data availability (O’Donovan, 1983; Bowerman and O’Connell, 1987). This is often difficult to do in practice, and entails a highly subjective prediction of future market conditions and inflation (Akintoye, 1991; Akintoye and Fitzgerald, 2000).
Construction Management and Economics
ISSN 0144-6193 print/ISSN 1466-433X online © 2004 Taylor & Francis Ltd
The need for more objective methods, and the benefits of quantitative predictive cost models in general, in the construction industry has been recognized for some time (e.g. Skitmore, 1985; Al Khalil, 1999; Al-Tabtabai et al., 1999; Ferry and Brandon, 1999; Li and Love, 1999; Li et al., 1999; Yin, 1999). As a result, a diversity of cost models of varying complexity has been devised by researchers. Apart from the fuzzy sets (Chang et al., 1997; Mason and Kahn, 1997) and artificial neural network approaches (Williams, 1994; Fang and Tam, 1999), statistical methods have also been extensively applied in TPI prediction, with regression analysis (RA) being the most popular approach (Boussabaine and Elhag, 1999). Univariate time series (TS) modelling has also received favourable attention. For instance, TS models have been developed to forecast the behaviour of property prices (Chin and Mital, 1998) and building costs (Taylor and Bowen, 1987) – later extended by Fellows (1991) for predicting movements in the TPI. Most recently, Ng et al. (2000) adopted discriminant analysis for predicting TPI directional changes.
Following Granger and Newbold (1986), researchers (e.g. Granger, 2001) have suggested that the integration of techniques might further enhance the predictive ability. In TPI prediction, the RA and TS models are the most highly developed, with RA establishing the relationship between the TPI and predominant economic indicators (e.g. McCaffer et al., 1983; Runeson, 1988; Fellows, 1991; Hoptroff et al., 1991; Fitzgerald and Akintoye, 1995; Akintoye et al., 1998; Chau, 1998), while TS estimates the index trend through historic TPI data. The objectives of this paper are to outline the procedures for integrating the RA and TS models and to examine the reliability of the resulting model in generating TPI forecasts for Hong Kong construction projects.
The RA variables comprised the TPI and nine exogenous economic indicators identified in Ng et al.’s (2000) similar previous Hong Kong study (see Appendix 1). The period covers a total of 76 quarters starting from 1980Q1 to 1998Q4. Despite a constant increase in the TPI, the construction tender price during that time was heavily affected by world recession (in 1982), the Gulf War (in 1991) and Asian Economic Turmoil (in 1997). Clearly, therefore, using this duration for subsequent analysis could help determine the extent to which an integrated RA-TS model will be influenced by volatile conditions. The required data was acquired from the relevant sources and publications of the HKSAR government (HKCSD, 1999).
To determine the relevancy of the suggested candidate indicators, a Pearson correlation analysis between the TPI and each of the nine indicators (with various degrees of leading and lagging) was carried out. With the exception of BLR and UR, there are strong positive correlations, indicating the trend of the TPI to be highly correlated with most of the indicators used. This is in line with previous research, except for BLR (interest rate), which has been found previously in the UK to have a strong positive correlation with the TPI (Fellows, 1988).
By comparing the correlation coefficients under different time lags, it was also found that the BLR movements led TPI movements by three quarters, GDP and GDPC by two quarters, with HSIAV, IGDPD and BCI leading by one quarter. CCPI, M3 and UR on the other hand, had no apparent leading or lagging effects.
Regression analysis
RA has been widely used for the prediction of tender trends (e.g. McCaffer et al., 1983; Fellows, 1988; Runeson, 1988; Akintoye and Skitmore, 1990, 1993, 1994). Regression models provide accurate predictions of TPI movements when price levels are steady, e.g. moving constantly upward or downward (Ng et al., 2000). In this study, a multivariate RA with an automated stepwise procedure was adopted to eliminate those factors with negligible effects on the TPI and provide a subset whose estimated equation produces the best fit, i.e. the minimum residual sum of squares or the maximum coefficient of determination, R2.
Table 1	Summary table of the stepwise procedure of multivariate regression

GDP, GDPC and IGDPD are automatically eliminated from the model due to their negligible influence in the regression model.
Table 1 summarizes the stepwise procedure of the multivariate RA. Variables are added or removed from the regression model step by step. The partial R2 indicates the partial potential contribution of variables
to the whole regression model, i.e. the greater the partial R2, the greater the significance of the variable. In this analysis, the most important variable was BCI (partial R2 = 0.9753) with the least important variable being M3 (partial R2 = 0.0003). GDP, GDPC and IGDPD were automatically eliminated as they provided a negligible potential contribution to the regression function (partial R2 < 0.0001).
The RA model was fitted to the lagged exogenous variables by forward stepwise variable entry, the resulting multivariate regression function being:
Before Equation 1 can be used for forecasting, the future values of exogenous variables (i.e. BCI, CCPI, BLR, UR, M3 and HSIAV) have to be determined.
These future values can be derived by the growth rate of the historic periods of each exogenous variable and then extrapolated for the next two quarters. For instance, if the general growth rate of exogenous variable BLR from 1980Q1 to 1989Q4 was 4% per quarter, then the estimated BLR for 1990Q1 and 1990Q2 would be 1.04 and 1.042 times of BLR1989Q4 respectively. Based on Equation 1 and the projected exogenous variables for the forthcoming one and two quarters, the TPI for the coming quarters can be forecasted.
The simplest TS approach is exponential smoothing. This forecasting method is not based on the analysis of the entire historical TS. Rather, it uses a weighted moving average as the forecast, with the assigned weights decreasing exponentially for periods further into the past. Simple exponential smoothing is most effective as a forecasting method when cyclical and irregular influences comprise the main effects on the time series values. However, the exponential smoothing method was considered inadequate to provide an accurate model for TPI prediction, as it assumes that errors are uncorrelated, which in turn implies that the observations are uncorrelated. In practice, this assumption can rarely be met, as serial correlation is usually expected when data is collected sequentially in time.
A stochastic TS modelling technique known as AutoRegressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA), however, can represent a variety of correlation structures (Yin, 1999). While Auto-Regressive (AR) estimates the stochastic process underlying a TS where the TS values exhibit non-zero autocorrelation (autocorrelation being the way observation in a TS is related to each other), Moving Average (MA) estimates the process where the current TS value is related to the random errors from previous time periods.
According to Fellows (1988), stochastic TS should be satisfactory in modelling tender price movements, as it can model the changing process and provides a class of models of the stationary stochastic processes. Therefore, the ARIMA models were adopted for model building, and Box-Jenkins identification-estimationchecking iterative procedure (Box and Jenkins, 1976) was followed when devising the TS model (see Appendix 2 for details of ARIMA and Box-Jenkins iterative procedure). Taylor and Bowen (1987) and Fellows (1987) have used this technique and found it to be satisfactory in modelling TPI movements.
The data series were found to be stationary after the first differencing (p = 0.06849) and the Ljung modification of the Box-Pierce Qstatistics indicated the residuals to be reasonably random (t = –4.032, p > 0.05). Maximum likelihood parameter estimates were obtained. To determine the best-fit model, all models were examined by diagnostic checking. First, the estimation model with highly significant parameters (see (a) in Figure 1 for t-value), such as AR1, AR2, MA1, MA2, etc., were selected. If the absolute value |t| of the last (highest order) parameter estimation (see (b) in Figure 1) is close to 1 or greater than 1, it is possible that the process is non-stationary.
Next, the residual was checked by examining the p-values of the Q-statistics (see (e) in Figure 1). In addition, as the residuals should be uncorrelated to each other, large residual autocorrelations (i.e. those very close to 1) may indicate problems with the fit of the model. The remaining candidate models was further examined by the checking the goodness-of-fit criteria through variance estimates – AIC & SBC (see [c] & [d] in Figure 1). The MA(2) model shown in Equation 2 below provided the best fit to the data, and the low autocorrelations (see (f) in Figure 1) confirm that the residuals to be random.
where et is a random error term uncorrelated over time, typically called white noise; Yt is the value of TPI time series in current time period t; and Yt−1 is the value of TPI time series in previous time period t −1.
Equation 3 shows the MA(2) model with the backshift notation (see (g) in Figure 1), i.e. the lagged value of the time series variable.
where B1 is actually B**(1), which represents a first order backshift operator, e.g. B1Yt = Yt−1, while B2Yt = Yt−2.
Forecasts were made based on its own historic data. For example, for forecast made in one quarter ahead, let us say forecasting TPI of 01/10/96, historic data from 01/01/80 to 01/07/96 was used.
Figure 1	Results of fitting the MA(2) model by SAS
The RA and TS models were integrated by linear combinations by considering the forecasts made by RA and TS as f1 and f2 respectively. From this, a new forecast of these quantities can be produced by:
where l is the weighting which is restricted to the range (0,1).
Goodness-of-fit statistics assist in assessing the fit of a model. These statistics can be compared across competing models, and typically the model with goodnessof-fit statistics closest to zero provides the best fit. The mean square error (MSE) and its positive square root (RMSE) are often used to evaluate the fitness of models, as the MSE minimizes the sum of the variance and the square of the bias.
The weightings were derived by iteration (Figure 2). As illustrated in Table 2, the weight column represents the weighting for the RA model, while the MSE and RMSE are used as the goodness-of-fit statistics for comparing models. Since both the MSE and RMSE reach the minimum at a weighting of 0.5, further investigations within the range of 0.4 to 0.6 were performed to identify a weighting scheme that could generate a smaller residual, i.e. the goodness-of-fit statistics closest to zero.
Table 3 reveals that both the MSE and RMSE reach the minimum at a weighting of 0.51 (for the RA component), and hence further investigations within the range 0.50 to 0.52 was carried out, with an interval of 0.01, to obtain an optimal weighting. The results of iterative looping using a 0.001 interval indicate that the weightings of 0.512RA : 0.488TS for a TPI forecast of one quarter in advance (RA-TSQ1) yield the closest-to-zero values for both MSE and RMSE. That means the RATSQ1 model is almost equivalent to the average of the RA and TS forecasts. For the TPI forecast in two quarters ahead (RA-TSQ2), the weightings of 0.647RA : 0.353TS result in the closest-to-zero values for both MSE and RMSE. Unlike the RA-TSQ1 model, the weighting of the RA component is virtually twice as much as that for the TS part in the RA-TSQ2 models, indicating that the RA results are more significant in improving the accuracy of the two-quarter forecast.
Backcast testing
The holdout samples between 1/1/1990 and 1/4/98 were fitted into the RA-TSQ1 and RA-TSQ2 to examine the forecasting accuracy. Figures 3 and 4 show the actual TPI as compared to the results of the one and twoquarter forecasts based on different models, while the part results of the two-quarter forecasts are summarized in Table 4. The upper and lower 95% confident limits were used to determine the model accuracy, and the forecasts would be considered correct should the actual TPI value is within the confidence limits of the corresponding quarter. With the RA-TSQ1 model, no actual TPI value falls beyond the confidence limit, representing 100% accuracy. More than 75% were within ± 1 of the standard deviation (3.1845). As for the RA-TSQ2 model, out of the 34 holdout samples, only 1 quarter (i.e. 1997Q3) has the actual TPI value outside the prediction interval, which implies that 97% of test data lies within the prediction interval.
Figure 2	Iterative loop to determine the best weighting combination
Percentage deviations were calculated by comparing the deviation to the half-forecast range. The actual value is out of the forecasting range if the percentage deviation is greater than 100. The smaller the percentage, the more accurate the forecast is. Tables 5 and 6 highlight the quarters with percentage deviations exceeding 100 when using the RA, TS and RA-TS models. The forecasting accuracy between the RA and TS models is similar when used for one-quarter TPI forecast, as both models have two inaccurate predictions (i.e. 1991Q2 & 1997Q4 for the RA model, and 1994Q4 & 1997Q2 for the TS model). However, the forecasts for these periods were improved (i.e. percentage deviation < 100) when RA-TSQ1 model was adopted. For two-quarter TPI forecast, the RA model was the most accurate, while the TS model was the worst (with four inaccurate predictions: 1992Q1, 1997Q2, 1997Q3 & 1998Q2). Using the RA-TSQ2 model improves the forecasting accuracy by leaving only one inaccurate prediction (i.e. 1997Q3). The overestimation of TPI between 1991 and 1992 may be caused by the launching of democratic reforms in Hong Kong at that time, resulting in sudden economic and political shocks. The under-estimation in 1997 may be due to an over-optimistic expectation for the economic
Table 2	MSE and RMSE for different weighting
Observation
Goodness of fit statistics
Table 3	MSE and RMSE for weightings from 0.40 to 0.60 at an interval of 0.01
Observation
Goodness of fit statistics
prospect after the sovereignty of the HKSAR was returned to China. The effects of these economic and political shocks are reflected through the pattern changes of some exogenous economic indicators, such as GDP (dropped from 1998Q3), IGDPD (dropped from 1998Q3), UR (rose from 1997Q4), etc.
An integrated model is described for forecasting construction TPI movement. The model was derived by amalgamating the analytical power of both the RA and TS models. Hong Kong data pertinent to exogenous and endogenous variables were collected and used for model building. A multivariate regression function was derived using the five exogenous variables which have significant effects on the regression function, i.e.
BCI, CCPI, IGDPD and HSIAV. The forecasting power of the RA was considered exceptional, with only two quarters exceeding 95% confidence limit (when used for one-quarter forecast). Therefore, in the absence of any sophisticated analytical model, the RA
Figure 3	Actual TPI and forecast generated by various models – one-quarter forecast
Figure 4	Actual TPI and forecast generated by various models – two-quarter forecast
should provide a reasonably reliable indication as to the TPI movement.
The derivation of the TS model was based on the stochastic ARIMA approach. Guided by the Box-Jenkins procedure for TS model development, the data was first checked for stationarity, and models with different parameters were then checked to establish the best-fit TS model. The MA(2) model was considered most suitable for the TS prediction. However, the predictive ability of the TS model alone is not as good as the RA. The percentage deviations revealed six quarters to have been inaccurately predicted by the MA(2) model (i.e. two and four for one and two-quarter forecast respectively). The TS model, therefore, may not adequately provide an accurate forecast when used in isolation with these data.
Table 4	Forecast made two-quarter ahead by RA-TSQ2 model


Deviation from
Deviation from
forecast range (%)
standard deviation = 6.2394; deviation from forecast range = deviation ÷ half of the forecast range (i.e. between upper and lower confident
Table 5 Part results of percentage deviation for one-quarter forecast

Table 6 Part results of percentage deviation for two-quarter forecast

The RA and TS models were then linearly combined based on the weightings of 0.512RA : 0.488TS for RA-
TSQ1, and 0.647RA : 0.353TS for RA-TSQ2. The results of backcast testing confirmed that the integrated RA-TS model outperforms both the individual RA or TS forecasts. Only one quarter has the actual TPI value exceeding the confidence limit (based on RA-TSQ2), indicating that 97% of test data lies within the prediction interval. The integrated RA-TS model, therefore, should have a high potential of improving the forecasting accuracy of TPI movement even under a rapidly changing economic environment. While the study presented in this paper was based on the Hong Kong data collected within a finite period of time, the findings should help improve our understanding on the possible problems and techniques when a predictive model for TPI forecast is developed in future.
