The influence of personal characteristics on effectiveness of construction site managers
To cite this article: Campbell Fraser (2000) The influence of personal characteristics on effectiveness of construction site managers, Construction Management & Economics, 18: 1, 29-36, DOI: 10.1080/014461900370924
To link to this article:
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
Construction Management and Economics (2000) 18, 29± 36
The in¯ uence of personal characteristics on effectiveness of construction site managers
School of Management, Grif® th University, Brisbane, Queensland, 4111, Australia
Received 8 April 1998; accepted 7 January 1999
It has been suggested that construction site managers’ career progression may be affected because of the existence of certain personal characteristics that conform to industry stereotypes. These stereotypes need to be identi® ed and examined in a systematic manner to ensure that the rationality of human resource management policy is indeed justi® able. A set of 26 personal characteristics believed to in¯ uence the effectiveness of construction site managers is identi® ed by senior construction managers using the nominal group technique. These characteristics are tested for correlation with effectiveness using a non-results-based effectiveness index. A questionnaire survey was completed by 61 site managers for this purpose. The results suggest that of 26 identi® ed personal factors believed to be important the only ones which may actually be related to effectiveness are: involvement in continuing professional development, number of ® rms worked for, use of addictive substances, education level, membership of professional bodies, job satisfaction, motivation level, career aspiration, stress level, leadership style and the need to work. The ® ndings will assist those recruiting, retaining or promoting site managers to make a more informed judgement of key factors in¯ uencing effectiveness.
Site management, effectiveness, in¯ uences, personal characteristics
Introduction
There is a considerable folklore in the construction industry surrounding the factors and characteristics that in¯ uence the effectiveness of construction site managers (CSMs). This is crystallized in the form of `beliefs’ regarding the reasons that some CSMs are perceived as effective and some CSMs as ineffective (Fraser, 1999). These beliefs frequently encompass a wide range of personal characteristics of the CSM. They extend over issues as diverse as family background, education level and alcohol consumption. However, beliefs may not be based on factual, scienti® c evidence. It is possible therefore that individuals may be wrongly inhibited from (or wrongly marked for) career progression as a result of exhibiting certain personal characteristics that conform to industry stereotypes. These stereotypes need to be identi® ed and examined in a systematic manner to ensure that the rationality and fairness systems within human resource management policy are indeed true.
This paper describes the process of identifying and testing the parameters of these beliefs against performance. It presents the method employed, and the results that were obtained. The commonly held beliefs were explored using a panel of 16 experts in construction site management. The panel produced a list of 26 characteristics which were not only believed to be related to the CSMs’ effectiveness, but also to be accurately representative of the industry folklore. The method described in this paper differentiates clearly (on the basis of statistical evidence) between the really salient characteristics and those personal characteristics which are believed to be salient but for which there is no evidence to support their having a signi® cant impact on the measured effectiveness.
Construction Management and Economics
ISSN 0144± 6193 print/ISSN 1466-433X online  2000 Taylor & Francis Ltd
This work is concerned primarily with the beliefs currently held by managers in the construction
Therefore it is necessary to de® ne the concept of a `belief’ and place it within the given context. Sproull (1981) describes a belief as an understanding that represents credible relationships between objects, properties, and ideas. Beliefs result from individuals’ reactions to given stimuli, and may well be affected by such factors as national, industry or organizational culture and enhanced by high levels of social interaction (Zarkada, 1998). Through the mechanism of strong industry culture and the collegial professional environment found in construction (Zarkada, 1993) these beliefs are further established as `truth’ and become more widely diffused (Zarkada and Fraser, 1998).
Sproull (1981) also notes that an awareness of certain types of behaviour may involuntarily emphasize the very ideas that create the behaviour. In essence, individuals justify behaviour both prospectively and retrospectively by what they believe. CSMs may be recruited, retained or promoted on this basis. These all too human tendencies have been reported in various situations (Gar® nkel, 1967). Just because they are frequent, however, does not mean that they can be left unexamined to rule over processes that are purported to be rational and structured.
In summary, it would appear that beliefs provide a level of perceived justi® cation for organizational actions and are used to clothe, in quasi-rationality, choices based on stereotypes, some of which amount to pure prejudice. For these reasons, it is vital to go to the source of the beliefs in order to ® nd real justi® cation for accepting them as part of the shared body of knowledge of the contemporary construction industry. The present research acknowledges this need, and aims to investigate whether or not beliefs concerning the personal factors which in¯ uence the effectiveness of CSMs are justi® ed or not. For more about beliefs in organizations, the reader is directed to Eiser (1980), Sproull (1981) and Morley (1984).
In the context of construction site management, it is clear that, with the notable exception of Mustapha (1990), previous studies (e.g. Fryer, 1979; Brown, 1983) have not directly addressed the source, the validity or the impact of established beliefs held regarding the desirability of certain personal characteristics of CSMs. Moreover, there has been no theoretical framework, or methodology, capable of supporting a study of the effect of personal characteristics on CSM effectiveness. It is obvious that there are both conceptual and methodological gaps in the construction management literature. Even though mainstream management science literature provides a set of general guidelines for the development of a framework, its ® ndings are too broad and general, and thus in need of adaptation and re® nement. Some ideas, but no concrete ® ndings, are offered by the authors in the construction management discipline. None of these, however, is aimed directly at checking the validity of the commonly held assertion that there is a
relationship between certain personal factors of CSMs and their effectiveness. The closest related works are concerned primarily with construction management skills. These are brie¯ y reviewed here.
The work of Fryer (1979) epitomizes the approach taken generally to study the CSM as an individual. He focused his work on what CSMs actually do, as opposed to their personal characteristics. He found that his subjects spent a considerable amount of their time outdoors talking to people, mainly supervisors, about technical matters. Thus, they were mainly concerned with coordinating the people involved in performing the technical tasks, welding together effective teams. They attached rather less importance to planning and programming their projects and to their dealings with the design team and client. The CSMs were asked to rank the ® ve managerial skills, allocated by Fryer (1979), that they thought they personally possessed, in order of importance for effective management. The combined order, from the most to the least important was:
This research project described here identi® ed the personal factors which may facilitate the CSMs ability to perform these skills, and thus be effective.
Another attempt at determining the components of a common core of criteria that can be used to assess the skill (and subsequently the CSMs’ effectiveness) was made by Brown (1983). His survey of 54 managers working in construction identi® ed the following issues as being important factors:
1. achievement of quality;
4. ability to handle stress;
5. interpretation of design information;
6. record of safety on site;
10. judgment; 11. organizational ability;
12. technical knowledge.
Again, this study did not consider the actual personal characteristics of the CSM. Moreover, it has not really provided the required empirical, or even conceptual, links with effectiveness.
Another approach is that of examining behaviour and skills in the context of speci® c tasks at hand and the stages in the construction process. Rowlinson et al. (1993) have examined variations of leadership style employed by the same construction managers in different circumstances plus the culture-speci® c results of managerial behaviour modi® cation (Lingard and Rowlinson, 1994). The surrounding circumstances have been documented and analysed successfully but their impact is considered only in relation to one important personal characteristic: leadership style. They found, for example, that project leaders tended to use a supportive style in feasibility study and pre-contract stages of works and a directive style as construction progressed. The relevance of these studies is not just restricted to the obvious fact that leadership style is a crucial personal characteristic of an individual. The deeper relevance of their work to the present analysis is that they have demonstrated the dynamic nature of personal characteristics, that are adaptable to job needs and circumstances and manageable attributes of the individual. What still remains to be done is a similar, comprehensive study of a wide range of characteristics.
Mustapha (1990) provides the only study which, among other factors, considers some personal characteristics which may in¯ uence CSM effectiveness. For example, he concludes that a high quali® cation is particularly important for projects of a high value and, in the case of civil engineering projects, a degree is important regardless of the project value. He states that membership of professional bodies and overseas experience `might’ be important, and that job satisfaction is an important consideration. Another conclusion of Mustapha (1990) is that long years spent in the industry and the company can no longer be considered a prerequisite in recruitment and selection policy. However, Mustapha’s (1990) work is much more comprehensive than just considering personal factors, and a need still exists for an evaluation of a wider ranging pool of personal characteristics.
Given the limited existing literature pertaining directly to CSMs, there would appear to be a need to identify and empirically establish the characteristics that potentially in¯ uence the CSM’s level of effectiveness. This work aims to ful® l this need.
Empirical identi® cation of potentially salient personal characteristics
A number of conditions determined the methodological approach to the study. First, the lack of a comprehensive list of individual characteristics that have an impact on managerial effectiveness indicated that the pooled intelligence of a select group of knowledgeable individuals was desirable. Second, as explained by Delbecq et al. (1975), in order to understand social phenomena, often it is necessary to obtain the views of the actors. Certain group processes enable the researcher to obtain the views of the critical actors.
A literature review alone, especially when it does not uncover any relevant empirically founded work, may provide generalizations that do not necessarily re¯ ect reality. As the preceding analysis has demonstrated, this applies directly to the issues under study here. What was sought in this research project was the formation of a review panel comprising decisionmakers in contracting organizations. The individual participants would have to be in a position where they are asked, in the course of their duties, to assess the new entrants to the site management ® eld and act as mentors preparing them for their future tasks. The same people are also expected to be acting as advisers to the CSMs’ employers.
Finally, it is often bene® cial to use groups, according to Delbecq et al. (1975), in order to ensure the applicability of the research results. More speci® cally, if the goal is to solve a problem of a particular group, it is reasonable to expect that the group will eventually be more likely to accept the research ® ndings if they have participated in the research design and concept generation process. This can occur only through direct communication between decision-makers and researchers. The group setting is the perfect context for such communication.
Composition and function of the panel of experts
In order to identify people that could provide the list of potentially salient personal characteristics, a qualitative empirical research design was utilized. First, the top 20 construction companies in Australia were contacted and were asked to provide a representative to participate in the panel of experts. The nominated representatives had to ful® l the following essential criteria. They had to 1. hold a senior position in the company (contracts manager, chief construction manager or construction director); 2. have at some stage in their career been a CSM; 3. be actively involved in the recruitment and promotion of CSMs; 4. have experience of a variety of large scale projects, including multi-storey residential construction as used in this current work; and 5. be willing to participate in the research and commit the time and effort required. Finally, it was desirable (and indeed all respondents were found to feel) that: 6. their personal beliefs regarding personal characteristics that determine a CSM’s effectiveness were at least consistent with, if not highly representative of, the views held generally in the industry.
Of the 20 companies approached 16 companies were able to provide a representative. The panel consisted of these 16 senior head-of® ce-based construction managers. It was convened in Brisbane, Australia, using the nominal group technique (Delbecq et al., 1975; Olsen, 1982). This process has been used extensively in business and government for identifying problems, exploring solutions, and establishing priorities.
The nominal group technique (NGT) allows individual judgments about a topic or issue to be pooled and used where uncertainty or disagreement exists about the nature of a problem and possible solutions. A comprehensive description can be found in Delbecq et al. (1975). The four steps of NGT are: 1, the silent generation of ideas in writing; 2, recording of ideas; 3, serial discussion of the list of ideas; and 4, voting.
The members of the panel were asked to identify the personal characteristics that in¯ uence a CSM’s effectiveness. Their lists were pooled and each person was then asked to nominate the characteristics from the extended list that they believed most in¯ uenced effectiveness. Finally, after the second round of voting, agreement was reached to select the 15 overall highestscoring personal characteristics for inclusion in the research. These characteristics are listed in Table 1. Operationalization of these 15 broad characteristics to
Characteristic
Experience was to be measured over years in the construction industry, with the company, with full responsibility for a construction site, interstate experience, overseas experience, managerial and non-managerial posts held outside construction
Formal education
As classi® ed by Queensland Department of Education
Craft training
Completion of accredited apprenticeship programme
Measured as `boss stress’ (stress emanating from one’s superior), `job stress’ (stress directly related to the project itself), and `environment stress’ (stress from external sources e.g. family) as developed by Djebarni (1996)
Leadership style
Measured using the Blake and Mouton (1964) 5 point scale (survival, family, production, compromise and team)
Measured on a 1± 5 Likert-type scale based on Hellriegel and Slocom (1992)
Measured using the 5-point Thomas (1976) con¯ ict management style grid (avoidance, smoothing, compromise, forcing and collaborative)
Satisfaction
Measured on a 1± 5 Likert-type scale based on Hellriegel and Slocom (1992)
Career aspiration
Measured on a 1± 5 Likert-type scale
Total amount spent per month
Addictive substances
Measured in total hours
Professional body membership
Measured in terms of level of commitment, as monitored by the Queensland Chapter of the Australian Institute of Building
Need to work
Measured by the 3 point scale of Kahn (1981). If the respondent was ® nancially independent , would he/she stop work, continue present employment or seek alternative employment
Number of construction ® rms
Number of companies worked for
Table 1	15 identi® ed personal characteristics
enable measurement resulted in an end total of 26 characteristics. The ® nal 26 characteristics used for measurement were presented to the panel in order to verify that none of the original concepts which were excluded would be more important than the broken down characteristics. Unanimous agreement was attained from the panel that the 26 characteristics ® nally used for measurement were indeed considered most appropriate for the study. The 26 characteristics that were actually measured are listed in Table 2.
Following a pilot study, a questionnaire survey was conducted with a sample of CSMs working on high rise residential construction projects in Australia. All the sites were suf® ciently operational and well established for all members of staff to be familiar with each other and in a position to have formed an opinion on the job requirements and how well these were met by the CSM under evaluation.
The CSMs’ effectiveness index was calculated using Fraser’s (1999) method. The selection of the samples for the questionnaire survey was as follows. After two pilot studies, the effectiveness measurement method that was developed was used to evaluate a random sample of CSMs. Uniformity was sought in terms of
Characteristic
Length of service in construction

Length of service with current company
Length of service with full responsibility
Experience overseas
Construction companies worked for
Membership of non-professional bodies
Amount spent on gambling
Level of formal education
Craft training
Membership of professional bodies
Career aspiration
Boss stress level
Leadership style
Need to work
construction type, size, and procurement method in order to standardize the job requirements and minimize the impact of exogenous factors. The type of project chosen was high rise residential construction.
There were 61 participants, and each of them nominated ® ve individuals, with whom they had a close working relationship, as their evaluators. The criteria for selecting evaluators were that they had to be willing to participate and knowledgeable in terms of the construction process, what is required of a CSM, and of the performance of the individual they were to assess. Evaluators included architects, quantity surveyors, subcontractor managers, engineers, client’s representatives and immediate superiors/subordinates of the CSM. In addition, in the questionnaire for the CSMs themselves, the personal factors were sought out through multiple choice questions with reference to education, background, work satisfaction, motivation and behaviour. Information on work experience and habits was sought through open-ended questions that could be completed in a single word. A combination method of personal introduction, mail distribution and telephone data collection of the responses was used. The overall response (61 CSMs), represented a 48% response rate.
The assessment process used in Fraser’s (1999) method employed a modi® ed version of Mustapha’s (1990) list of competence elements, each element detailing a particular aspect of the CSM’s job. The evaluators were asked to assess the CSM’s level of ability on each of 52 elements on a ® ve point scale de® ned as follows: 1 = incompetent, 2 = weak, 3 = fair, 4 = good and 5 = outstanding. They were also asked to indicate the importance of each competence elements on a ® ve point scale de® ned as: 1 = no importance, 2 = limited importance, 3 = important, 4 = of great importance and 5 = of paramount importance. A sample of the instrument used is shown in Figure 1.
The effectiveness score represents the average of the sum of points each evaluator assigned to each one of the 52 competence elements used. The range of possible scores was from 52 (if all evaluators had given the minimum one point for each competence element) to 260 (if all evaluators had given the maximum ® ve points for each competence element). The range of scores that the subjects actually achieved extended from 111 to 231. The mean score was 169.
Depending on the type of measurement used for each personal characteristic, different statistical tests were used to investigate the relationship between effectiveness score and personal characteristics. When the characteristic under investigation was measured on a continuous scale, giving interval data (where the difference between 1 and 2 is the same as that between 15 and 16, for example), correlation tests between effectiveness scores and the characteristic were performed. These were the non-parametric Spearman’s rank correlation, the parametric Pearson’s correlation, and the non-parametric measure of concordance between judges, Kendall’s tau. These tests measured whether the existence of the characteristic tended to increase
Figure 1	Research instrument format
or decrease the effectiveness scores. When the personal characteristic was measured on the nominal (categorical) scale or the ordinal (rank) scale, the nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis one-way Analysis of Variance test was used. This test measures whether the effectiveness scores were different for each level of response to the question posed.
tive hypothesis. In this current work, these null hypotheses are based on the acceptance that the personal characteristic of the CSM appears to exhibit no relationship with effectiveness. As a guide to the level of signi® cance, in this current work extremely signi® cant is considered to be a p value < 0.000 05, highly signi® cant is considered to be a p value < 0.01%, and signi® cant is considered to be a p value < 0.05%.
The p-value results are presented in Table 3. On the basis that there is signi® cance at p < 0.05, across all tests
Table 3	Summary of results in terms of p values
Characteristic

Length of service in construction
Length of service with current company
Length of service with full responsibility for site
Experience overseas
Membership of non-professional organizations
Amount spent on gambling
Craft training


The ® ndings of this research are reported as p values. A p value is the probability associated with the testing of each statistical hypothesis. We interpret such a ® nding as evidence supporting the rejection of the null hypothesis and the acceptance of the alterna-
used it is suggested that the characteristics listed in Table 4 do not exhibit a relationship with managerial effectiveness. On the basis that there is signi® cance at p < 0.05 across all tests used, it is suggested that there is a relationship existing between the personal characteristics listed in Table 5 and managerial effectiveness. A comment is provided next to each, based on observations obtained from graphical presentation of the results.
Table 4	Personal characteristics exhibiting no relationship
with effectiveness
Table 5	Personal characteristics exhibiting relationship with effectiveness
Characteristic

There is a general trend for CSMs involved in some CPD to attain higher effectiveness scores
Construction ®
Most high scoring CSMs have worked for no more than three companies during their career in the construction industry
Effectiveness scores appear to decrease slightly with increased smoking if we discount the nonsmokers
In general, as alcohol consumption increases there is a slight decrease in effectiveness scores
Formal education
Most of the CSMs with very high effectiveness scores had completed tertiary quali® cations
Professional bodies
The median effectiveness score for CSMs who were active members of professional bodies was much higher (230 points) than the median effectiveness score for those who were not members
Job satisfaction
All high scoring CSMs were either satis® ed or very satis® ed with their jobs and only higher scoring CSMs were extremely satis® ed with their job
Almost all CSMs who considered themselves to be extremely highly motivated were very high scoring
Career aspiration
All those actively seeking career development had higher than average effectiveness scores
Boss stress
Those CSMs under intolerable boss stress scored low in general; those under signi® cant boss stress scored average effectiveness; and the CSMs with moderate boss stress included those with high effectiveness scores
All high scoring CSMs had limited stress or no stress at all from external factors and moderate or signi® cant external stress coincided with low effectiveness scores
Leadership style
High scoring CSMs favoured team-style leadership; those CSMs following a production style of leadership scored the lowest of all; and CSMs using a compromise leadership style had middle
range effectiveness scores
Need to work
In general, CSMs who would continue to work in their present job even if they had enough money to satisfy their needs scored much higher than CSMs who would not work at all or seek alternative employment
The main striking conclusion of this research is the fact that only half of the identi® ed personal characteristics appear to exhibit a relationship with the effectiveness of
CSMs. It would appear that the factors listed in Table 3 are being falsely taken into consideration in the recruitment, retention and promotion of CSMs.
However, more positively, the characteristics listed in Table 4 do indeed appear to exhibit a relationship with the effectiveness of CSMs, and therefore should, as far as the spirit of employment law permits, be taken into consideration. The extent to which each factor should be taken into consideration or any relationship existing between these factors is still the subject of further investigation as detailed in the appropriate section. The strength of this exploratory research is not necessarily in the actual conclusions given, but in the framework provided for the further development of the ® ndings into a structured recruitment, retention and promotion system for use by construction ® rms.
Application of the research results
By collecting information on the salient personal characteristics, the decision makers, or the CSMs themselves, can identify the `strong’ and `weak’ points in each individual, cultivate the former and modify the latter. In the event that the Fraser (1999) assessment process results in unsatisfactory effectiveness scores, an important application of this research lies in its provision of a reliable means of identifying and positively addressing the speci® c reasons behind low achievement. So, as an alternative to dismissing an underperforming CSM, the organization can consider training, professional development, behaviour modi® cation or counselling to improve performance. Use of this second stage of the effectiveness assessment process can improve employee con® dence in the organization and general morale, thus eventually reducing employee turnover and increasing the quality of the service they provide to the organization. This process is illustrated in Figure 2.
Recommendations for further work
The aim of this paper has been to identify salient personal characteristics of effective CSMs, rather than the relationships existing between them. However, it is desirable to develop a pro® le of the `ideal’ CSM based on relationships existing between factors. Numerous statistical techniques have been applied in
Figure 2	Conceptual model of contribution to industry
order to test for correlation between factors identi® ed as signi® cant. So far, there has been no conclusive evidence. Some insights could possibly be achieved using a neural network.
It would also be useful to take a subset of overall effectiveness and correlate it with personal characteristics with a view to behaviour modi® cation. For example, this current work could build on the work of Lingard and Rowlinson (1994) on behaviour modi® cation and site safety by considering the personal characteristics that may support such initiatives.
The evaluators of the CSMs’ effectiveness came from different disciplines and backgrounds within the construction industry. Their perceptions on what it is the CSMs do well and where they need skill development can be aggregated and compared on the basis of the evaluators’ positions. Thus, it would be possible, for example, to see the aggregate pro® le of the CSM through the eyes of the quantity surveyor. This kind of approach, apart from its intrinsic interest and contribution to the body of knowledge, could also be used to explain some of the sources of tension and con¯ ict in construction. When used alongside qualitative data on expectations that other construction professionals have of CSMs, the role of the CSM can be de® ned better.
The list of personal characteristics was devised empirically. Alternative lists produced by differing methods could enhance or expand the existing list. One possible method would be through a theoretical rather than empirical approach. In mainstream management literature, a large number of factors have been associated with managerial effectiveness and many personal characteristics have been tested through in-depth sociological and psychological studies. These have yet to be applied to the particular conditions of the construction industry.
