Valuation of the minimum revenue guarantee and the option to abandon in BOT infrastructure projects
To cite this article: Yu‐Lin Huang & Shih‐Pei Chou (2006) Valuation of the minimum revenue guarantee and the option to abandon in BOT infrastructure projects, Construction Management and Economics, 24: 4, 379-389, DOI: 10.1080/01446190500434997
To link to this article:
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
Construction Management and Economics (April 2006) 24, 379–389
Valuation of the minimum revenue guarantee and the option to abandon in BOT infrastructure projects
YU-LIN HUANG* and SHIH-PEI CHOU
Department of Civil Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, 1001 Ta-Hsueh Road, Hsin-Chu 300, Taiwan
Received 18 October 2004; accepted 24 October 2005
The real option approach is used to value the minimum revenue guarantee (MRG) and the option to abandon in Build-Operate-Transfer infrastructure projects. The option to abandon is formulated under an investment option held by the concessionaire at contract signing and to expire before construction commencement. MRG is formulated as a series of European style put options in a single option pricing model. When combined with the option to abandon in the pre-construction phase, MRG is reconstructed as a series of European style call options to develop a compound option pricing formula. The Taiwan High-Speed Rail Project is chosen as a numerical case to apply the formulas. The results show both MRG and the option to abandon can create values. When MRG and the option to abandon are combined, they will counteract each other and their values will thus be reduced. Increasing the MRG level will decrease the value of the option to abandon, and, at a certain MRG level, the option to abandon will be rendered worthless.
BOT, infrastructure, real option, option to abandon, minimum revenue guarantee
Introduction
Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) infrastructure projects differ significantly from more traditional construction projects in how projects are implemented during the pre-construction phase. For traditional projects, the owner is responsible for project planning, environmental assessment, property acquisition and project funding. For BOT projects, the concessionaire is usually required to undertake project development tasks. The concessionaire faces substantial project development risks. Even if the concessionaire can successfully accomplish these tasks, BOT projects often become financially not viable due to changes in external investment conditions. As a result, BOT projects are more likely to fail in the pre-construction phase than in other project phases. To reduce the concessionaire’s investment risks, BOT concession contracts often grant the concessionaire an option to abandon during the pre-construction stage (Huang, 1995).
Likewise, BOT infrastructure projects usually face substantial revenue risks during the operation phase. To avoid the downside risks of revenues, the
concessionaire often negotiates with the government to provide a minimum revenue guarantee (MRG). Under an MRG, the government is obligated to cover the shortfalls between a pre-specified level of MRG and operating revenues realized by the concessionaire. MRG can increase the concessionaire’s willingness to invest. It can also enhance the credit worthiness of BOT projects facing high revenue risks, since the guaranteed cash inflows can provide a minimum level of debt coverage.
The presence of the abandonment option will increase the concessionaire’s flexibility in investment decisions and thus increase project value. The valuation of the option to abandon can be done by real-option theories (Dixit, 1989; Trigeorgis and Mason, 1989; Trigeorgis, 1993). The use of real-option theories in BOT project evaluation is not a new idea. Ho and Liu (2002), for example, developed a real-option pricing model to value government debt guarantees in BOT projects. For traditional construction projects, the realoption approach has also been used. For example, David et al. (2002) show that the real-option approach can be applied in traditional project planning; Tien (2002) analysed time-to-build options in sequential construction; andMichaelandCharles(2004)developedamodel
Construction Management and Economics
ISSN 0144-6193 print/ISSN 1466-433X online # 2006 Taylor & Francis
The presence of MRG can also increase project value, but the valuation of MRG is still an open issue. Paddock, Siegel and Smith (1988) had developed a real option approach to value offshore petroleum leases as staged-options, which also face substantial project development risks. But the obligation to pay under an MRG is very different from that of leasing. While the lessee usually promises to make a series of fixed payments to the lessor, the undertaker of an MRG pays only when project revenues fall below a prespecified level of MRG. The undertaker will not pay at all when the realized operating revenues are higher than the MRG level.
This paper studies the valuation of the MRG and the option to abandon in the pre-construction stage. The option to abandon is formulated under an investment option held by the concessionaire, and the expiration date of the investment option is at the targeted construction commencement date. The MRG is constructed as a series of European style put options under a single option model. When the MRG is combined with the option to abandon, they will counteract each other, and the valuation becomes more complicated. The MRG is re-constructed as a series of European style call options to form a compound option.
Taiwan High Speed Rail Project is used as a numerical case to apply the derived option pricing formulas. The results show both the MRG and the option to abandon can create substantial values under the single option settings. In the compound option model, they counteract with each other, and their values are reduced. An increase of the MRG level will decrease the value of the option to abandon, and when the MRG level is high enough, the option to abandon will become worthless.
In the following sections, this paper begins with formulating a single option pricing model for the option to abandon in the pre-construction phase. MRG is then constructed as a series of European style put options to derive a single option pricing formula. A compound option model is further developed to combine the MRG with the abandonment option under the same BOT package. The Taiwan High Speed Rail Project is used as a numerical case to apply the derived formulas, and then observations and policy implications are drawn accordingly.
Valuating the option to abandon during the pre-construction stage
Figure1 shows the lifecycle of a typical BOT project after concession tendering. It begins with a preconstruction phase at time t50, when the concession contract is signed, and ends with project transfer at t5T, when the concession period expires. The concession contract often provides the concessionaire options to abandon during the lifecycle (Huang, 1995). We only focus on the pre-construction phase, since BOT projects are more likely to fail in this phase.
The concessionaire may decide to walk away at any time during the pre-construction phase, but we assume the final decision can only be made at the targeted construction commencement date, or t5tB. We also assumed that once the concessionaire decides to invest, the project cannot be abandoned thereafter. Once the concessionaire decides to invest, the project will thus be completed on time and become operational at t5tO. It will be operated for m years, from t1 to tm, and then transferred at the end of the concession, or t5tm5T.
Based on these assumptions, the option to abandon is formulated under an investment option held by the concessionaire’s at t50 and to expire at t5tB. Let R denote the project’s operating revenues. Suppose R is a random variable, and follows a generalized Wiener process:
Here, a is the growth rate of R. It has a variance s2 during a very short interval dt. dR is the shortfall rate between the project’s discounted rate m and the growth rate of R. The shortfall rate resembles the dividend payout rate of a stock option. The rate is the opportunity cost for keeping an option alive rather than exercising it. dz is the incremental part of the Wiener process. The expected value of dz is zero, and the variance of dz is equal to dt.
Further let I denote the project’s total costs, and suppose I include both capital investment cost and operation cost. Suppose I is not stochastic in nature, and the growth rate of I is E during a short interval dt.
Figure 1	Typical BOT project life-cycle after contract
Here, the shortfall rate of I is denoted as dI. The rate is the opportunity cost avoided by holding the option to abandon until its expiration date tB. If the amount of I is deterministic, then E is zero, and dI5m.
Let F denote the value of the concessionaire’s option to invest. F is a function of state variables R, I, and time t, or F5{F(R, I, t)| t g[0, tB]}. By contingent claim analysis (Black and Scholes, 1973), F should satisfy:
The boundary condition of this partial differential equation (PDE) is:
~½PtB {ItB H Pð tB {ItB Þ
Here, H(v)5{1|v>0, 0|v,0}. In this formulation, Rt1 is the revenue of the first operating period, r is the riskfree interest rate, and ItB is the present value of I at tB. ItB includes both capital investment cost BtB and operation cost CtB , and PtB is the present value of total operating revenues at tB. The boundary condition implies that the concessionaire will exercise the option to invest at tB with strike price ItB if and only if PtB > ItB ; otherwise, the project will be abandoned. Following McDonald and Siegel (1986), let Z and W(Z, t) be the transformation variables:
Accordingly, Equation3 is simplified:

This PDE is similar to that of the original BlackScholes model. Using the solution methods by Kutner (1988) and Hwang and Jou (1994), the price formula of the option to invest can be derived:

ln P0=I0 { s2=2 tB	pffiffiffiffi k2~	pffiffiffiffi	~k1{s tB s tB
Let f denote the value of the option to abandon. The value is the difference between the value of the investment option and the project’s NPV at t50:
f ~F{P0{I0	ð6Þ Substituting Equation5 into Equation6 gives the following price formula for f:
This solution is similar to that of a European style put option. Here, P0 is the present value of operating revenues, I0 is the present value of the total investment costs at t50, and N(? ) is a cumulative normal distribution function.
In a single option setting, the MRG can be constructed and valued as a series of European style put options in the operation phase. Let Mti define the MRG level specified in the concession contract, i51,m. The downside risk of operating revenues is limited to Mti , and the project’s nth period payoff function is shown in Figure2. To find the pricing formula for the MRG, we decompose the project’s payoff function into two parts, namely an nth period operating revenue and an MRG cash inflow; see Figure3 and Figure4 respectively. In Figure4, the payoff from the MRG is specified as
(Mtn {Rtn ), which defines the shortfall below Mtn undertaken by the government.
Let Qtn denote the value of the nth MRG, R for the projected operating revenues, and dM for the shortfall rate with the same property as dI. Assume R is stochastic in nature as specified in the previous section. Qtn must satisfy:
Lt subject to
Figure 2	The nth period revenue payoff function
Figure 3	The nth period revenue payoff function from R
Figure 4	The nth period revenue payoff function from
Solving by the same solution method gives the following price formula:

Here, R0tn is the present value of Rtn , and Mt0n the present value of Mtn . Both of them are discounted by m at t50. Let Q denote the total value of the MRG. Q is found by
Combining MRG with the option to abandon
When the MRG and the option to abandon are combined under the same BOT package, they will interact with each other. Suppose the holding of the MRG option is dependent on the concessionaire’s decision to invest at tB. The concessionaire’s option to invest at t50 can be formulated as an option on option, or a compound option, under which the exercise payoff of the option to invest is related to the MRG level.
To derive the compound option pricing formula, first reconstruct Figure2 as two different payoff functions:
Figure 5	A constant cash flow
constant cash flow denoted as Mtn (Figure5), and a European style call option whose value is written as Atn (Figure6). The strike price of the call is Mtn , the exercise payoff is (Rtn {Mtn ), and the expiration date is at the end of tn.
At t5tB, the concessionaire decides whether or not to invest ItB for obtaining the combined value of Mti and Ati , i51,m. Once the concessionaire decides to invest, the project cannot be abandoned thereafter. Thus, if the concessionaire does not abandon at t5tB, s/he will obtain all Mti and Ati , i51,m. Each call option Ati is independent, to be exercised only if the realized operating revenue at ti is above the MRG level according to Figure6.
Suppose FM is the value of the option to invest at t50. FM is the aggregated value of Mti and Ati . To find FM, first amortize the present value of I at tB, denoted as ItB , by m portions, and let Dti denote the amortized cost at ti, i51,m. Under this amortization schedule, the concessionaire decides at t5tB either to invest the present value of Dti for obtaining Mti and Ati or not. The calculation of Dti is presented in the next section.
Then, let’s start with the nth period of the concession contract. When the concessionaire decides to invest at t5tB, the present value of the nth amortized cost DttBn is invested for Mtn and Atn . We treat the contingent MRG cash inflows as cost-reducing factors for option valuation, and the amount invested for the nth period can thus be rewritten as (DttBn {Mtn e{mðtn{tBÞ), with a corresponding exercise payoff Atn . Here, Mtn is discounted by m at tB.
Figure 6	A European style call option
Let Ftn denote the value of the option to invest for the nth operating period. Ftn is the function of state variables, Rtn , Dtn , and time t: Ftn ~fF Rð , D, tÞjt[½0, tBg. Accordingly, the strike price of Ftn is (DttBn {Mtn e{mðtn{tBÞ). By contingent claims analysis, Ftn must satisfy:
Here, D is assumed to have the same property as I, as statedabove.IftheamountofDisfixed,thentheshortfall rate of D is equal to that of I, which in turn is equal to the discount rate. Since Ftn resembles a European style call option, Equation10 must satisfy the following boundary condition:
Here, r~Mtn e{mðtn{tBÞ DttBn , and H(? ) is the same unit step function as defined before. This boundary condition impliesthat,if Ftn > 0 at tB,thentheamountDttBn ð1{rÞis invested for keeping the European style call option Atn alive. Atn is a function of state variables R, M, and time t: Ftn ~fA Rð , M, tÞjt[½0, tng.
Further let RtBtn be the critical asset price, so that
Ftn ðR, D, tBÞ~0. If RttnB > RtBtn , then the concessionaire will decide to invest at tB. By contingent claims analysis, the value of Atn must satisfy:
Lt subject to
Here, since the MRG level is specified, M has the same property as I. This boundary condition implies that Mtn will be invested for Rtn if and only if Atn > 0 at tn. Since Mtn e{mðtn{tBÞ~rDttBn , by chain rule,
Furthermore, let j, X(j, t), and Y(j, t) be the following transformation variables:
Accordingly, Equation10 is simplified:

Xðj, tBÞ~½Y{ð1{rÞH Y½ {ð1{rÞ and Equation14 simplified as:
Equations15 and 16 are the joint PDE of the compound option. Following the solution method by Geske (1979) gives the price formula for Ftn at t50 as a closed-form solution:
Ftn ðR, D, 0Þ~R0tn B a1tn , b1tn ;

In this solution, B(? ) is a two-dimensional cumulative bivariate normal distribution function with a correlapffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
tion	coefficient	tB=tn	for	overlapping	Brownian increments. Rtn0 is the present value of RtntB at t50. The calculation of the critical asset price Rtn0 is related to the amortized cost D0tn , as presented in the next section. Let Fti denote the value of the option to invest for the ith period. FM is found as an aggregation of Fti , i51,m, or Pm
Now, we can derive price formulas for the MRG and the option to abandon. First let Qf denote the value of the MRG at t50. Qf is given by:
Here, Fti ðR, D, 0ÞMti ~0 is the value of the option to invest at t50 for the ith period underlying assets without the MRG. Note that, in the pricing Equation17, if
Mtn ~0, Rtn0 is equal to D0tn , and Fti ðR, D, 0ÞMti ~0 is given by:
This solution is the similar to Equation5.
Then, let fM denote the value of the option to abandon at t50. Since the holding of the MRG is dependent on the concessionaire’s decision to invest at tB, fM is calculated by subtracting the project’s NPV and the value of the MRG from the value of the compound option at t50; that is, m " m #
Calculating the amortized cost DttBn and the
The foregoing compound option is formulated under the condition that the decomposed m investment options are all exercised together at t5tB or never, and the MRG is constructed as a series of independent options, which will be exercised only if the realized operating revenues fall below the pre-specified MRG level. In other words, once the concessionaire decides to invest at t5tB, the following boundary conditions should be satisfied:
Here, the value of Ati at tB can be found by the solution methods from Kutner (1988) and Hwang and Jou
Ati ðR, D, tBÞ~RttBi N k1ti {MttiB N k2ti ð22Þ where
Substituting Ati into Equation21 gives the following (m+1) equations:
These equations have (m+1) unknowns, namely Rt1tB and DttBi i51,m. The first m equations can be summed up as:
) is the one-dimensional cumulative normal distribution function. Since the values of k1 and k2 are dependent on Rt1tB , Equation24 is nonlinear, and thus Rt1tB can only be found numerically. Once Rt1tB is found, the	amortized	costs	DttBi	can	be	calculated	by Equation23, the critical asset prices RtitB	can be calculated by eð{mzaÞðti{t1ÞRt1tB , and Fti can be obtained by Equation18.
Now, let’s examine the special case when the MRG is absent from the foregoing formulation. First, if M50, then k1R‘, k2R‘, N(? )51, and Equation24 can be simplified as:
Rt1tB	eð{mzaÞðt {t Þ{It ~Pt {It ~0	ð25Þ
Here, the calculation of Rt1tB is straightforward, and the amortized costs DttBi are equal to their corresponding critical asset values Rt1tB , which can further be found by:
2 Rt10 3	2 D0t1 3
In Equation17, if M50, then b1ti ? , and the two-dimensional cumulative bivariate normal distribution function can be written as:
Equation17 can thus be simplified as Equation19.
Since	RtitB ~Rt1tB eð{mzaÞðti{t1Þ,	a1ti	and	a2ti	can	be calculated by: a1t1~a1t2~...~a1ti ~...~a1tm ,
and a2t1~a2t2~...~a2ti ~...~a2tm ,
As a result, the price formula is given by:
This result is the same as Equation5. In fact, when the MRG is not provided, the compound and the single option pricing formulas will always lead to the same valuation so long as the amortization schedule satisfies the following conditions:
R0t1	R0t2	R0ti
D0t1	D0t2	D0ti

Table 1	Data and assumptions
The concession period (yrs)
Construction
Expected growth rate a	0.06
Growth rate volatility s	0.3
Discount rate m	0.12
Construction cost B0:
Operating cost C0:
The corresponding annual operating cost, Cti
The Taiwan High Speed Rail BOT Project is now used as a numerical case to apply the foregoing pricing formulas. The Project’s detailed financial data and projections can be obtained from the authors. As summarized in Table1, the Project’s total concession period is 36 years, the present value of the total capital investment cost is NT$ 242422M, and the present value of the operating costs is NT$ 101429M. The variation of the Project’s revenues is small, so the Generalized Wiener process can be applied. The average growth rate is thus estimated at 6.02%, and we use 6% as an approximation. The volatility of Taiwan’s stock market price varies from 0.2 to 0.4, and we use 0.3 as the volatility of the growth rate. Finally, the Project’s discount rate is estimated at 12% by the financial consultant.
For the purpose of this application, we suppose the Project has an MRG, and the annual MRG levels are equal to the corresponding annual operating costs. In addition, although the construction commencement date is not specified in the concession contract, suppose the pre-construction period of the project is one year after the contract signing date. Table1 includes a preconstruction cost and its present value is denoted as J0. The cost is required to keep the Project alive until t5tB. It will reduce the Project’s NPV, or NPV5P02I02J0, and affect the value of the investment option. Therefore, the price formula for F should be adjusted. When the MRG is not available, the price formula is as the following:
When the MRG is available, the price formula for FM is adjusted as:
Results and interpretations
The results of this numerical case are shown in Table2, from which we have the following observations:
(a) The Project’s NPV is NT$139,508M, so the
Project is financially feasible.
(b) The option to abandon creates values. Thevalue of the option, or f, is NT$7436 M, calculated by either Equations5 or 28. By Equation5, for example, the shortfall rate is calculated at 6% from the growth rate and the discount rate. N(k1)50.9047, N(k2)50.8434, and F5NT$ 146944M. F is greater than the Project’s NPV, and the amount of f is obtained by subtracting the NPV from it.
(c) The MRG also creates values. The option value of the MRG, or Q, is $7716M, calculated by Equation9.
(d) When the options are combined, the foregoingvaluations change. The value of the option to invest with the MRG, or FM, is NT$152897M, calculated by the adjusted compound option pricing formula in Equation29. The MRG value or Qf is NT$5953 M, calculated by subtracting F from FM by Equation19. And the value of the option to abandon is $5673M, calculated by subtracting the NPV and the value of the MRG from FM by Equation21.
(e) As a result, when the MRG and the option to abandon are combined, their values are reduced. The values disappeared are called joint value, which is equal to NT$1763M in this numerical case. This result is consistent with Trigeorgis’ observation. When options intended to control downside risks are exercised at the same time, they will counteract each other, and thus reduce their own values (Trigeorgis, 1993). There are two counteracting forces in our compound option. On one hand, the value of the MRG cannot be realized if the option to abandon is exercised at tB. So long as there is a chance that the project will be abandoned, the value of the MRG will not be fully realized. On the other, the presence of the MRG will increase the value of the underlying assets of the option to abandon, and thus reduce the value of the option itself.
(f) Although the option values are reduced, the total value created by the compound option is still substantial. The value is NT$13389M, calculated by subtracting the joint value from the original values of the MRG and the option to abandon in the single option models.

Policy implications
Both the MRG and the option to abandon are valuable policy tools as we have shown, but the government should check if they will produce intended policy effects when combined in the same BOT package. For example, Table3 shows if the pre-specified level of the MRG is increased by 250%, then the value of the option to abandon will decrease to NT$10M, which is no longer substantial compared to the Project’s NPV.
In general, the investment value of BOT projects increases with the MRG level, but the increase of the MRG will decrease the value of the option to abandon. In terms of risk allocation, the higher the MRG level is, the more the down-side risk is transferred to the government, and the less likely the concessionaire will exercise the option to abandon. When both the MRG and the option to abandon are proposed at the same time, the government should check if the proposed MRG level will render the option to abandon worthless.
In practice, the MRG may be valuable from an investor’s perspective, but it requires substantial budgetary commitments. The benefits and costs of the commitments should be justified, and the pricing formulas can be used as valuation tools. When the project is not bankable due to high revenue risks, the lender may ask the government to provide MRG for a minimum level of debt coverage. In this case, MRG can also be justified by credit enhancement benefits to the concessionaire, such as reduced financing costs. However, to know how much the financing costs can be saved, MRG should be valued from lender’s perspective. This appears to be another open issue.
Whenever there are budgetary constraints, the option to abandon is a preferable, more easily justified policy choice; especially it can only be used in the preconstruction phase. If the option can be used during construction and operation, abandonment will cause greater disruptions and disturbances, and this will make the justification more difficult.
Two single option pricing models were first developed for the valuation of the MRG and the option to
abandon in the pre-construction phase. The MRG was further combined with the option to abandon to develop a compound option model.
The Taiwan High-Speed Rail Project was used as a numerical case to apply the derived option pricing formulas. The results indicated that both MRG and the option to abandon could create substantial values. When the MRG and the option to abandon were combined, they counteracted each other and their values were reduced. If the level of the MRG were high enough, the option to abandon would be rendered valueless.
Change of the MRG level
Table 3	Comparative static
MRG involves substantial budgetary commitments, and its benefits and costs should be carefully justified. The option to abandon is a preferable policy choice under budgetary constraints, and its justification is more straightforward.
Overall, the application of the real option approach in BOT project evaluation looks promising. The option pricing formulas developed in this paper can be used as valuation tools for the foregoing justifications as well as extensions of traditional project evaluation approaches, such as the discounted cash flow model. But the presented formulas are limited in scope. They do not consider the options to abandon during construction and operation. In addition, if the MRG is to be used as a credit enhancement tool, it should also be valued from the lender’s perspective. Future researches are required to tackle these problems.
The authors wish to thank the National Science Council for research grant under contract number NSC 93-2211-E-009-043.
