Organization, Technology and Management in Construction 2023;
Research Paper 	Open Access
Assessing the innovative skills and competencies required of construction management graduates
August 01, 2022; April 16, 2023 Abstract: The construction industry has been experiencing high waves of revolutionised innovative technologies globally. These resulted from the highly innovative demands of the 4th industrial revolution (IR), which does not exclude the construction industry. These technologies do not rely on traditional design and build principles, and they require sophisticated skills and competencies. Currently, the construction industry is still struggling to find professionals with innovative competencies and the skills needed to manage the building lifecycle process. These have been a major concern in developing countries’ construction industry sector. Employers in the construction industry are now looking for construction management graduates (CMG) who are academically qualified and also possess considerable construction-related innovative skills and competencies in related technological software or tools. This study investigates the expected core skills and competence required by CMG. The methodology entails a well-structured systematic literature review, wherein 13 expected core competencies and 27 expected core skills were identified. Based on these, primary data were elicited through an online Google Forms survey distributed to professionals in the Nigerian construction industry. A total of 330 valid responses were obtained. Relative Important Index (RII) and principal component analysis (PCA) were carried out and presented. The result reveals the industry’s expectations and provides guidance to CMG seeking employment in the construction industry. Understanding the industry expectations and possessing the required core competencies will enable the CMG to
*Corresponding author: Modupe Cecilia Mewomo, Department of Construction Management and Quantity Surveying, Durban
University of Technology, Durban South 4001, South Africa,
James Olaonipekun Toyin, Department of Construction Management and Quantity Surveying, Durban University of Technology, Durban South 4001, South Africa
remain relevant in the dynamic built environments. This study contributes to building information modelling (BIM) knowledge and the current innovative competencies and skills required in the built environment. BIM, competency, challenges, skills, management, employment drive, Nigeria, students
1 Introduction
In this study context, ‘construction management  graduates’ are also called ‘building graduates’. Construction management (CMt) is the discipline that entails managing a construction project or projects as effectively as p ossible (Arditi and Alavipour 2019). Construction Manager (CM) duties entail and are not limited to making the best use of available finances; e fficient project scheduling; controlling the scope of work; avoiding delays, revisions and conflicts; improving project design and construction quality; and  contracting and  procurement flexibility (Arditi et al. 2009). The  revolution in the construction industry has resulted in a tremendous amount of skill being demanded of the  construction management graduate (CMG). Moreover, the need for c onstruction managers arose centuries ago – in fact, such a need has probably been prevailing ever since the time when humans first created shelters to protect themselves from threats such as weather and animals. Since then, construction process management has been of such a vital importance that it cannot be neglected, regardless of how rudimentary or modest the structures requiring to be c onstructed might be. We have arrived in the 21st century (4th industrial revolution [IR]) because of this progress.
Open Access. © 2023 Toyin and Mewomo, published by Sciendo. This work is licensed under the Creative Commons  Attribution 4.0 License.
Besides, Yogeshwaran et al. (2018) and Yap et al. (2021) noted the need to evaluate the expected skills and  competencies of quantity surveyors (QS). Similar research (Wang and Cheng 2022) was reported in China, and  Abdullah et al. (2017) researched in Australia, focusing on construction managers. However, all indication shows that the current IR entails incorporating information technology (Toyin and Mewomo 2023) in the management of construction activities. Thus, this has left the  construction industry with no option but to adopt such innovative technology that is capable of managing information throughout the lifecycle of the construction process. Building information modelling (BIM) technology has been seen, tested and proven as an innovative technology that can function perfectly well in the construction industry (Dossick et al. 2014; Kolarić et al. 2018; Toyin and Mewomo 2021). Notwithstanding, several researchers highlighted the ‘need for BIM skills’ (Hodorog et al. 2019) in the built environment. For example, Mohd and Latiffi (2013), Wang et al. (2020), Hodorog et al. (2019) and Toyin and Mewomo (2023) stated that using a BIM workforce aids in cost savings and enhanced time management through clash detection.
Innovation in construction is defined as changes that lead to an improved input–output relationship for products and processes, as well as changes within the technical, management or legal organisation of a project that can be monetised (Brockmann et al. 2016). Thus, the construction industry is still faced with the challenges of getting innovatively skilled professionals with the required competencies to manage the construction lifecycle process. These have remained difficult to find. The construction managers (CM) are under tremendous pressure as most struggle to align themselves with the evolving innovative technology in the construction industry (Demirdoven and Arditi 2014a). Based on their good degree of familiarity with this emerging technology, a few fresh CMG could secure employment offers in reputable construction companies; in contrast, some old construction managers are being retrenched (Torres-Machí et al. 2013; Abdullah et al. 2017) since they cannot meet the evolving innovative technology trends in the construction industry. Such innovative trends in construction include but are not limited to BIM, robotics, digital twin technology, artificial intelligence (AI), augment reality (AR), the use of drone, etc. (Brockmann et al. 2016; Hodorog et al. 2019; Toyin and Mewomo 2022; Wang and Cheng 2022).
Therefore, construction industry employers now seek to employ CMG who are academically sound as well as possess necessary construction-related innovative skills and competencies in related technological software or tools, such as ‘BIM’, Microsoft Project (MSP), etc., that can be used to manage the project throughout its lifecycle. Although very few studies focus on this area, none have tried to conduct such related research in Nigeria. Therefore, this study investigates the expected core skills and competence required of CMG in the Nigerian construction industry. The specific objectives are to: (a) ‘identify and appraise the critical competencies needed to keep pace within the revolving industry’; and (b) ‘examine the core innovative skills expected of CMG’.
2 Theoretical background
CM is both a demanding and challenging profession. The responsibilities of a construction manager include the following, as documented in the literature (Baharudin 2006; Arditi et al. 2009; Yaman et al. 2015; Maina 2018):
• Supervise and direct construction projects from start to finish
• Review the project in-depth to schedule deliverables and estimate costs
• Coordinate and direct construction workers and subcontractors
• Select tools, materials and equipment and track inventory
• Prepare internal and external reports about job status
• Negotiate terms of agreements, draft contracts and obtain permits and licences
As a result of these responsibilities, being relentless and prudent in achieving goals is a key attribute of a construction manager; as such, they need to be informed of everything that happens during the project. Thus, determining the precise truth is also necessary for them to work successfully (Pellisé Tintoré 2014).
2.1 Expected critical competencies of CMG
Competency is defined by GWA (2022) as the combination of behavioural qualities, skills, abilities and knowledge required to generate adequate results on the job. Buvik and Rolfsen (2015) see competence as ‘the abilities, skills, and capabilities that a person has in a particular domain’. Yap et al. (2021) agreed with Wao and Flood (2016), who refer to competency as the major criterion utilised to improve the performance of professionals in their different occupational sectors.
Based on the preceding definition, competence may be understood as the capacity to use a specific characteristic of knowledge, skills, talent or personal qualities to accomplish/deliver critical activities or tasks effectively. Turner (2017), Arditi et al. (2013) and Mühlbacher et al. (2013) see leadership characteristics, technical knowledge, behaviours and competence in strategic and corporate management as part of the critical skill sets for good project managers. Torres-Machí et al. (2013) conducted a study focussing on CMG in Spain; their opinion was sought to understand why the unemployment rate among young graduate of CMt professionals is very high. The main reasons given were lack of adequate communication (due to the mixed nature of professionals in their  industry),  inadequate university program design (lack of BIM  knowledge), lack of e agerness to work, a refusal to relocate, inadequate master’s degree to meet market demands, an economic crisis and too many universities offering similar graduate degrees.
The study by Wang and Cheng (2022) in China  identified 40 general competencies expected of CMG. The author’s findings reflected that the current a cademic  curriculum of tertiary institutions in China could not cater for the construction industry’s expectations. Moreover, it tends to be too theoretical and lacks practicality. The industry expected the graduates to be able to ‘write a  comprehensive technical report, to analyse the technical issues and to provide ongoing feedback to the teams’. Vaz-Serra and Mitcheltree (2021) conducted research in Australia; the aim was to understand the  competencies expected of project management graduates as required by the industry. Their study reveals that more significance is laid on interpersonal skills, competencies within core technical knowledge, sustainability and life cycle  analysis, and knowledge of environmental waste  management systems. The study of Mitcheltree et al. (2019) concluded that good communication; commitment to  personal development; emotional intelligence; resilience and  persistence; and commitment to professional  development are the top five traits the construction industry looks out for when recruiting graduates. Table 1 shows the competencies gathered from various published articles on  construction  managers. The variables documented in this table was used to elicit respondent opinion towards the study  objective on expected competency.
2.2 Expected core innovative skill
The CMG must possess special skills that allow them to face complex constructability difficulties, as well as the ability to visualise a finished product in an empty three- dimensional (3D) space (Martin-Gutierrez et al. 2012; Ahmed et al. 2014; McCuen 2015; Kim and Irizarry 2021). Ahmed et al. (2014) submit that the CMG that possess these skills are likely to meet up with the innovative evolving needs of the industry when they join the workforce. However, Williamson and Andrew (2018) point out ‘spatial skill’ as one of the terms used to describe core skills construction practitioners use to make informed decisions. These assist them in transforming abstract images into the finished creation. Dennis and Tapsfield (2013) state that spatial ability is ‘the ability to generate, retain, retrieve, and transform well-structured visual images’.
As discussed in the introduction section,  construction managers require basic skills in innovative t echnology. BIM is one of these revolutionised technologies e volving in the construction industry. Nevertheless, i ndividual BIM core skills are the personal characteristics,  technical talents and professional expertise required to perform a BIM activity or deliver a BIM-related output. These  capabilities, achievements or actions should be quantifiable in performance standards and might be  obtained or improved through education, development and training (Succar et al. 2013; Plawgo and Ertman 2021). According to Hodorog et al. (2019), traditional analytic approaches cannot capture the dynamic process of BIM. The expanding required number of new roles, such as BIM manager, BIM director and BIM technician, demonstrates the growing demand for BIM experts (Yalcinkaya 2013). Construction managers are more likely to pick up the role of BIM managers. BIM managers act as intermediaries between other construction professionals, working with architects, designers, engineers and clients to gather specifications and overseeing the creation of detailed structural plans (Construction 2021). Looking at the role of a construction manager on a project, it is immediately perceptible that they are expected to deal with the management of the entire resources on a construction project, and they act as an intermediary among all construction teams. Thus, they are close to being the BIM manager. They only need to obtain little knowledge in the coordination of BIM. However, according to Rahman et al. (2016), construction managers and BIM managers require distinct skill sets. Various scholars also emphasise the importance of skills such as collaboration and effective communication in the curricula. According to Dossick et al. (2014), a BIM syllabus should include an understanding of computer application principles and BIM procedures. Individual qualities such as aptitude, credentials, skills/abilities, knowledge and attitude are examined by Barison and Santos (2011). They note the professional necessity for the role in both fundamental and functional aspects. Rahman and Ayer (2017) assessed the capabilities of BIM in an organisation; the authors highlighted the following skills as required from construction managers: information and communication technology (ICT) skills, teamwork, a basic understanding of the BIM process, and analytical and problem-solving skills.
Critical competencies expected of CMG
Expected competency
