See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at:
Characterizing Interview-Based Studies in Construction Management Research: Analysis of Empirical Literature Evidences
Conference Paper · August 2021
CITATIONS	READS

81 PUBLICATIONS   609 CITATIONS
All content following this page was uploaded by Seng Hansen on 15 September 2021.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
CHARACTERIZING INTERVIEW-BASED STUDIES IN
1Construction Engineering and Management Program, Universitas Agung Podomoro,
*Corresponding author: seng.hansen@gmail.com
It has become more common in construction management research to use interview technique to gather qualitative data on practitioner opinions, attitudes, skills and best practices. This data is then analyzed using various qualitative analyses to produce findings and implications. However, one of the main problems raised in this study is the lack of standards and guidelines in conducting interview technique. Some of the issues are the lack of interview size justifications, the absence of criteria in selecting interviewees, and the lack of explanation regarding the analysis type conducted. These may cause weak interview data and lack of reliability of interview results. An empirical survey of 223 relevant papers was done to investigate this problem. This study reviews the gathered literature and presents descriptive statistics to characterize interview technique in construction management field. The discussions offer identification of interview characteristics in construction management research, explanation of factors influencing the data quality and saturation, and elucidation of factors influencing the analysis quality. Finally, a straightforward guideline to assist researchers in determining interview size in their studies is proposed.
Construction management research, Data saturation, Empirical review, Interviews.
Interview technique has often been used as one of the data collection methods in construction management research. It is considered as a qualitative method since it is characterized by an in-depth and holistic observation of a unique phenomenon. In practice, it involves at least two people who are the interviewer and the interviewee (Hofisi, Hofisi & Mago, 2014). The data obtained tends to be qualitative rather than quantitative (Galvin, 2015).
The popularity of interview as a data collection technique has substantially increased in recent years. The main value of interview technique is the richness in detail of the collected data. Construction management research can benefit from using interview technique to obtain a more realistic view of the phenomenon under investigation that cannot be understood using numerical data. It is descriptive in nature which allows the researcher to describe existing phenomena and situations. However, there have been several criticisms given in previous studies. These criticisms are mainly related to the lack of standards and guidelines in interview technique, data collection and analysis are often cost and time consuming, highly dependent on the researcher’s ability to collect and analyze the data, lack of consistency and reliability, and ethical issues since it involves human subjects (Alshenqeeti, 2014; Bogner & Menz, 2009; Hofisi, Hofisi & Mago, 2014).
The lack of standards and guidelines is also related to determining sample size and expert justifications in interview technique. Generally, samples in qualitative research tend to be small in order to support the depth of case-oriented analysis. Additionally, interview samples are purposively selected by virtue of their capacity to provide relevant information (Vasilelou et al. 2018). Some researchers have tried to establish the recommended number of interviews. For instance, Guest, Bunce & Johnson (2006) recommend at least 12 interviews while Kwok & Lau (2018) and Yang & Shen (2015) suggest a range from 10 to 20 interviews. Therefore, it is quite problematic to determine the interview size prior data collection. On the other hand, analysis of interview data is very dependent on the skills of the researchers involved which may result in the inconsistent findings of similar studies (lack of reliability).
This paper aims to investigate these problems from a statistical point of view through a systematic analysis of empirical literature evidence. An extensive literature over a 20-year period from Journal of Construction Engineering and Management (JCEM) and Media Komunikasi Teknik Sipil (MKTS) was used as the scope of this study. JCEM was chosen because it is a top global journal in the construction management field which has been publishing empirical studies online since 1983. Meanwhile, MKTS was chosen as a comparison from Indonesia. There has been no previous study that empirically discusses interview technique of both publications. This study contributes for future construction management research considering the increased popularity of interview technique.
This paper adopts empirical literature study to gain insights from literature evidences. According to Bettis et al. (2014), empirical studies can be purely exploratory using graphical and statistical approaches. In this paper, a systematic literature review was used to analyze the empirical literature evidences focusing on identifying and characterizing interview technique in construction management research. Table 1 presents the systematic literature review strategies as prescribed by Chan & Owusu (2017) and Hansen, Rostiyanti & Rif’at (2020).
Targeting literature sources:
JCEM and MKTS are used to represent international and national academic journal in the construction management field. Both are top referred journals and have frequently published online high-quality construction management papers since 1983 (JCEM) and 2003 (MKTS). In doing so, both journals use a transparent peer-reviewed procedure.
Searching for related literature:
The search engine in JCEM was located and an advanced search was performed to narrow down the search so that only related articles will be retrieved. All papers containing the word “interview” related to the topic of “construction management” published within the last 20 years (from 2000 to July 23, 2019) were extracted from the JCEM virtual library. A total of 299 articles were retrieved. Similarly, the search engine in MKTS was used to find all papers containing the word “wawancara” or “interview”. Six articles were retrieved.
Selecting relevant publications:
Once the related papers were available, a visual examination through reading the abstracts and skimming the contents was performed to identify relevant publications in this study. For that, the following selection criteria are used to include or exclude the retrieved articles: (1) interview technique is used as a method of data collection and/or validation, (2) interview technique which is referred to only as a reference (as in the literature review section) was excluded, (3) all types of data was included (i.e. studies
that quantified their qualitative interview data was included), and (4) studies that did not provide the exact number of interview size was included as well. As the result, a total of 223 articles were selected for analysis.
Analyzing the content:
Thematic content analysis was performed to analyze the content of selected publications. Some themes observed in this study include: year of publication, number of interviews, number of interviewees, interview type, interview format, interview technique, average interview duration, and research approach. After each article was analyzed and coded according to the theme, descriptive statistics are used to explain certain characteristics of interview technique.
Discussing and presenting the findings:
As part of data presentation, figures and tables are used to illustrate the characteristics of interview technique. All findings and implications were discussed and presented in the ‘Results and Discussion’ section.
There are two types of findings in this study, namely descriptive and statistical. Descriptive findings describe qualitatively various issues related to interview technique as a method of data collection and/or validation. This includes some key descriptions of interview technique, data saturation statements, expert justifications, and other characteristics. Basic statistics are then used to illustrate relationships between the existing characteristics which at the same time strengthened the descriptive findings. The results are grouped and discussed in the following four subsections.
3.1 Characteristics of the Interview Technique
The result of this study shows a positive trend in the use of interview technique in construction management research. This study reviewed the number of publications of JCEM for 20-year period which can be seen in Figure 1 (with dotted line indicating the increasing trend). On the other hand, the use of interview technique in MKTS has not been intensified over the years. There are only six articles that employed this technique.
Number of studies over 20-year period
The number of interviews and interviewees can also be grouped to identify which groups are most often found in this study. Number of interviews and number of interviewees are distinguished because at the time of analysis, several situations were found where the number of interviews was not always the same as the number of interviewees. For example, Zhou, Fang & Mohamed (2011) interviewed four experts but in two groups. Kale (2009) interviewed three experts but in four series of interviews. Thus, it can be concluded that there are four types of interviews:
(1) single interview. The interview is conducted in a one-to-one basis, meaning one interview reflects one interviewee. This is the most common type found in this study.
(2) group interview. An interview is conducted with many interviewees at the same time. Examples can be found in Zhou, Fang & Mohamed (2011) and Chen & Fong (2013).
(3) interview rounds. An interviewee can be involved in more than one interview. This usually happens when the involvement of an interviewee is needed more than once. An example of this type can be found in Shapira & Goldenberg (2007).
(4) unclear number of interviews/interviewees. In this case, the number of interviews and/or interviewees are not clearly stated in the publication. Researchers only explain that they have conducted interviews with several experts as representatives of groups or populations. Examples can be found in Arriagada & Alarcón (2014) and Ozorhon & Oral (2017).
The groupings of number of studies to number of interviews is illustrated in Figure 2. From 217 JCEM papers, as many as 67 papers (30.9%) did not clearly provide number of interviews. It shows that the majority of researchers use small to medium interview size in their studies. While there is no agreement regarding the category of sample size in interview technique, this study considers number of interviews less than 10 as small size, between 10 to 20 as medium size, and above 20 as large size based on the distribution of number of studies to the interview range.
The grouping of number of interviews
Basic descriptive statistics for JCEM papers are displayed in Table 2. It was found that the mean value of interview number is 28.1. The smallest sample of interviews in the studied papers was 1 and the largest was 860. Based on the analysis, small size interviews are commonly found in in-depth interviews while large size interviews are found in shallow interviews. Interestingly, the median of interview and interviewee numbers is 12. This corresponds to the opinion of Guest, Bunce & Johnson (2006) who concluded that data saturation was reached within the number of 12 interviews. Descriptive statistics of JCEM papers
Sample size of studies

This study also succeeded in identifying two purposes of conducting interview technique in JCEM: as primary method and as secondary method. Interview as primary method occurs when interview is used as the main approach in collecting data by researchers. Usually this can be easily identified if an interview procedure is provided in the ‘Methods’ section of the publication. Meanwhile, interview as secondary method occurs when it is not used as the main method of data collection but rather as a complementary method. There are two situations: (1) interview is used as an initial technique to assist researchers in survey design (e.g. Tabish & Jha, 2018), and (2) interview is used after the main technique as a way to validate the findings (e.g. Aljassmi & Han, 2013). It was found that the majority of studied papers (59.9%) used interviews as a secondary method. On the other hand, this study cannot provide descriptive statistics for MKTS papers due to lack of details available in the publications.
3.2 Factors Influencing Data Quality and Data Saturation
Other characteristics can be grouped based on their similarities, i.e. as factors influencing data quality and data saturation. Both data quality and data saturation are very closely related. In fact, data saturation has become a central issue when conducting interview technique since it affects the quality of data produced. It is defined as ‘the point at which no new relevant information is forthcoming, even if more people are interviewed’ (Galvin, 2015). While this issue is crucial, most of the studied articles however did not provide justifications on how they achieved data saturation or whether they had reached it. Only few papers provided certain statements which may lead to the conclusion of them having reach data saturation (as shown in Table 3).
