PROFILE OF PROJECT MANAGERS' COMPETENCIES FOR COLLABORATIVE CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS
1&2 Faculty of Built Environment, Tampere University, 33720 Tampere, Finland
3 Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Norwegian University of Science and
4 Faculty of Industrial Engineering and Management, University of Oulu, 90014 Oulu, Finland
Several studies have indicated that project managers’ competencies contribute to construction project success in a considerable manner. However, these studies have mainly addressed subject of the interest in the context of traditional construction projects. The choice of construction project delivery models is increasingly turning from traditional ones towards the integrated ones (also called collaborative delivery models). Thus, it is imperative to understand how the competency profile for the project managers needs to be developed to support their successful performance in construction projects with collaborative delivery models. To that end, the survey strategy was employed. Then, a self-evaluation questionnaire comprising 60 linguistic statements, representing 30 behavioural competencies, was utilized for analysing the type and frequency of project managers’ different behaviours in their everyday work in their current and target states (as is, and as the informant wants it to be in the future). This questionnaire was sent to 33 project managers of relevance in Norway and Finland with a response rate of 73%. The findings present the competency profile of project managers for collaborative construction projects. This competency profile comprises two groups of (i) competencies contributing to the individual performance of the project managers, e.g., trustworthiness, stress tolerance, initiative, optimism, and (ii) competencies contributing to the team performance and dynamics, e.g., conflict management, group capabilities, understanding others. The findings of this study can be insightful for project managers in collaborative construction projects to benchmark their competencies and improve their performance, and for their employers to hire the right project manager.
competency; collaborative project; integrated project delivery
The differentiators between successful performers and average ones have come to be called competencies (Zwell 2000). Moradi et al., (2021: 3) stated that "competencies are underlying characteristics (motives, traits, self-concept, skills and knowledge) which cause different kinds of actions while being combined with an intent, which is situation-oriented. The resultant action in a given situation is called competency." In terms of improvability, competencies related to skill and knowledge are relatively easy to develop, competencies related to motive and trait are hard to develop, and
Competencies for Collaborative Construction Projects In: Scott, L and Neilson, C J (Eds)
Proceedings of the 37th Annual ARCOM Conference, 6-7 September 2021, UK, Association of Researchers in Construction Management, 350-359
finally the competencies related to self-concept lie somewhere between and are somewhat hard to develop (Spencer and Spencer 1993; Zwell 2000). Competency, due to its behavioural nature, can predict and contribute to successful performance in a consistent manner. Consequently, project managers need to possess certain competencies because competency is an important predictor and facilitator of their successful performance, which in turn, has considerable effect on project success
In the field of construction projects, the importance of project managers’ competencies is considerably high as they are greatly responsible for the successful completion of the projects. Consequently, there exists substantial interest from the research community towards project managers’ competencies in construction projects (for instance, Ahadzie et al., 2008 and 2009; Dogbegah et al., 2011; de los RíosCarmenado et al., 2014; Klendauer et al., 2012; Tabassi et al., 2016). These efforts, in a holistic view, can be divided into two parts: studies addressing project managers’ competencies in construction projects with traditional delivery models, and in construction projects with collaborative delivery models and/or working practices.
Traditional delivery models of construction projects (e.g., design-bid-build, designbuild) usually separate design and construction phases, which in turn hinders early involvement of the contractor and other key parties in the project and its design phase. Moreover, the lowest construction price is usually the main criteria for selecting the contractor (Forbes and Ahmed 2011). On the other hand, collaborative delivery models (e.g., alliancing, partnering, integrated project delivery) have some elements and characteristics such as early involvement of the key participants of the project, shared risk-reward based on project outcome, joint project control and trust-based relationships. These elements enable the key parties, with aligned interests, to work together (collaboration) and exchange information (cooperation) for the good of the project (Engebø et al., 2020; Lloyd-Walker and Walker 2015; Fischer et al., 2017, Oakland and Marosszeky 2017). In this study, “traditional construction projects” and “collaborative construction projects,” represent the terms “construction projects with traditional delivery models,” and “construction projects with collaborative delivery models and/or working practices” respectively.
According to (Moradi et al., 2021), the undertaken studies addressing project managers’ competencies in construction projects have mainly focused on traditional construction projects (for instance, Ahadzie et al., 2014; Abdullah et al., 2018; Dziekoński 2017; Mutijwaa and Rwelamila 2007; Shah and Prakash 2018). Fig 1 shows those competencies for project managers of traditional construction projects which have been mentioned in the literature more than five times. Project managers’ competencies in collaborative construction projects have been studied in a limited manner by the research community (e.g., Walker and Lloyd Walker 2011; Moradi et al., 2020b). This study aims to find out how the competency profile for the project managers needs to be developed to support their successful performance in collaborative construction projects.
The survey strategy was employed for conducting this study where a web-based questionnaire, in a self-evaluation manner, was utilized to identify the most appropriate competencies of project managers in collaborative construction projects. Self-evaluation of behavioural competencies is an efficient and effective way for studying project managers’ competencies in a certain context (Liikamaa 2015; Chang et al., 2009).
Appearances of different project managers' competencies in the literature for traditional construction projects
The questionnaire was sent to 33 project managers of collaborative construction projects. Data collection was undertaken through non-probability volunteer sampling. These project managers were selected among the ongoing or recently completed alliance and/or partnering construction projects in Finland and Norway. These two countries were selected for data collection because of their representativeness in terms of collaborative construction projects (Hosseini et al., 2016; Moradi et al., 2020b). The categories of the studied construction projects in this study comprise housing construction (residential building), institutional construction (hospital and school), and infrastructure (road and railway construction). In total, 24 questionnaires were completed by 12 Norwegian project managers and 12 Finnish project managers (February-April 2020), and a response rate of 73% was achieved. Among respondents, 35% of them are/were working as the client’s project manager and 65% of them as the contractor’s project manager. Fig 2 presents the demographic information of the survey respondents.
The utilized web-based questionnaire “Cycloid”, by Evolute Technology, focuses on the evaluation of key behavioural competencies of project managers based on their current state (reality), target state (vision), and creative tension. Creative tension is the gap between personal vision (target state) and current reality (current state) (Chang et al., 2009; Liikamaa, 2015). In other words, creative tension is the willingness of an individual (here the project manager) to improve his/her competencies further.
Accordingly, 30 behavioural competencies of project managers were evaluated through 60 linguistic statements, two statements per competency. In this study, respondents were asked to choose and determine the frequency of their behaviours in the situations presented by each linguistic statement on a scale: never/seldom/often/always in their current and target state.
How often these behaviours occur in the statements representing each competency were evaluated both in the current and target states through analysing the numeric values of the current and target states of the self-evaluation results. Liikamaa (2015) has categorized these 30 competencies into two main groups and five subgroups (see Table 1).
Demographic information of the survey respondents
After its first development, Cycloid has been utilized in several studies for evaluating project manager’s competencies in different contexts (for instance Liikamaa 2015; Chang et al., 2009; Moradi et al., 2020).
Project managers' competencies in Cycloid
Analysing the obtained research data from the field surveys revealed the significance of project managers’ different competencies in the current state, target state and creative tension. Top 10 competencies of each respondent group in their current state, target state and creative tension were chosen and compared with each other for identifying the similarities and differences. Those top 10 competencies are seen as the most important ones contributing to the successful performance of the project managers. The ranking of the competencies listed in Fig 3 and 4 have been developed based on the median of the ranking in the current state, target state and creative tension of the two respondent groups. Those competencies with the same rank in both respondent groups, have been listed alphabetically.
Significance of Competencies in the Current and Target State
The following Fig 3 presents the results of comparing the 10 most significant competencies of the respondent groups in the current state and in the target state. Concerning the current state, it became clear that 7 out of 10 most significant competencies of both respondent groups were the same. These identified common competencies have been listed in Fig 3 and labelled as “common” under the category of “Current state.” Conversely, 3 out of 10 most significant competencies in the current state of each respondent group were different, and therefore, those six competencies, in total, have been labelled as “specific” under the category of “Current state,” as can be seen in Fig 3. Regarding the target state, similar results were obtained in terms of the number of commonalities and specificities (see Fig 3).
Among the identified common competencies in the current state, trustworthiness was the most significant one, with the statements concerning acting honestly and in an ethical manner and admitting mistakes. Among the specific competencies in the current state (Fig 3), responsibility was the most significant one. This competency is related to the quality of being responsible for the progress of one's own work and the feeling of responsibility over common goals. Fig 3 presents the complete list of the specific competencies in the current state. Regarding the target state, as listed in Fig 3, trustworthiness and responsibility, again, were the most significant competencies in the categories of "common" and "specific", respectively.
Project managers' competencies in their current state and target state
Creative Tension
The 10 most significant competencies of both respondent groups in terms of creative tension were compared. As can be seen in the following Fig 4, production efficiency, decision quality and understanding others are three competencies which were common between both the respondent groups. Production efficiency is the capability of project managers in performing tasks quickly and according to high standards. Decision quality is about making decisions based on principles, purposes, and values. Understanding others points out to project managers’ ability to sense the feelings and perspectives of other people.
The number of identified common competencies between creative tension of the respondent groups (listed in Fig 4) represents a weak overlap, unlike the current state and the target state. The most significant competency among the identified specific ones in creative tension is relationship building, which is related to the ability of project managers in building or maintaining friendly relationships or networks of contacts with people who are or might be useful in achieving work-related goals. The second one is communication representing the ability to listen to others, to openly express one's feelings, ideas and opinions and to read non-verbal cues. The third one is management for controlling people and things in a systematic way.
Stress tolerance, collaboration, and conflict management are three competencies here, which were also among the 10 most significant ones in the current and the target state. This amount of emphasis on these competencies means that stress and conflict amount can be very high in some collaborative contexts. The competencies (labelled “specific” in Fig 4) are seen, here, as the context-oriented ones which their contribution to the successful performance of project managers can be different based upon the specific characteristics of the collaborative construction projects, e.g., culture, contracting parties.
Project managers' creative tension competencies
Profile of Project Managers' Competencies for Collaborative Construction Projects
A profile of project managers’ competencies was developed for collaborative construction projects (see Fig 5). This was undertaken through analysing the 10 most significant competencies of both respondent groups in their target state and creative tension and identifying the common ones. This profile is comprised of two main parts: (i) competencies contributing to the individual performance of the project managers, and (ii) competencies contributing to their team performance and dynamics.
Competencies contributing to the individual performance
The obtained research results suggest that the identified competencies in this category mainly contribute to the project managers’ individual performance (Fig 5). Accordingly, these competencies enable project managers to be successful in the tasks, which they need to handle by themselves. In terms of the improvability, these competencies are mainly hard or somewhat hard to improve (except production efficiency), and therefore it is the most cost-effective way for employers to hire those project managers which already have these competencies. Production efficiency is the only competency in this group, which is easy to improve, and a cost-effective way for improvement is training.
Competencies contributing to the team performance and dynamics
The competencies of this category, as can be understood from their definition, seem to mainly contribute towards team performance (Fig 5). Accordingly, these competencies (group capabilities, conflict management) enable the project managers to succeed in those tasks, which need to be accomplished in cooperation with other team members. It also means that these competencies, (understanding others, decision quality) positively affect the project managers’ leadership, as a whole, which subsequently can improve team performance and dynamics.
Training provides a possibility for improving the competencies contributing to the team performance. These competencies that are improvable can be considered by employers for the recruitment of project managers and improving the performance of the present ones.
Project managers' competencies for collaborative construction projects
The findings of this study imply that successful project managers of collaborative construction projects need to possess two sets of competencies which are related to individual performance and team dynamics. Competencies related to individual performance are mainly related to the enduring characteristics and traits of the personality and therefore hard to improve. Conversely, the competencies related to team performance and dynamics can be easily improved through training, as they are related to skill and knowledge. Therefore, it can be argued that motive, trait and selfimage-oriented competencies of project managers in collaborative construction projects can mainly contribute towards individual efficiency and effectiveness, whereas skill and knowledge competencies can contribute towards better team dynamics and performance. Those competencies of project managers contributing towards team performance can be improved by training. A slight improvement in these competencies (skills and knowledge) will result in considerable development in the performance of the whole project team (Spencer and Spencer 1993; Zwell 2000).
The presented competencies in Fig 5 seem to be in line with the prior research and aligned with the key characteristics and elements of collaborative construction projects. As it has been stated by different scholars (e.g., Oakland and Marosszeky 2017; Fischer et al., 2017), collaborative construction projects represent a working environment in which the project manager, as the leader, collaborates and cooperates with the key participants based on trust-based relationships to form a single integrated team with aligned commercial interests solely for the best of the project. The developed profile in this study (Fig 5) presents those competencies which enable project managers to build reliable relationships with all team members (through trustworthiness, group capabilities, understanding others), and to reach out win-win situations (through conflict management and stress tolerance) when there is conflict within the project team. The project managers also need to be individually productive as the project leaders, where they need initiative, optimism, self-assessment and production efficiency competencies to succeed. The competencies presented in Fig 5 are also in line with the recent relevant studies (Moradi et al., 2021).
The developed profile of project managers’ competencies provides a novel researchbased contribution. It includes practical insights for the project managers and their employers to be aware of the value-adding competencies in the collaborative construction projects, which can be used in hiring the project managers and improving the performance of the existing ones. The presented results, for instance, in Finland with over 5 billion EUR launched collaborative construction projects (since 2013) can mean significant savings when selecting project managers with fitting competencies and also improving performance of the currently employed ones.
The presented competency profile and its details can be important and value-adding also for the other project professionals (e.g., project coordinators, site engineers, project controllers). These competencies, in the big picture, represent the individual efficiency and effectiveness, teamwork, mutual understanding and trust, collaborative cooperation, and no-blame related behaviour, which indicate the key elements and characteristics of collaborative construction projects (Moradi 2021).
CONCLUSIONS
This study aimed at understanding the spectrum of required competencies for being a successful project manager in collaborative construction projects. The results provide the basis for the following conclusions concerning project managers’ competencies in collaborative construction projects:
• The competencies contributing to the individual performance include trustworthiness, stress tolerance, initiative, optimism, self-assessment, and production efficiency.
• The competencies contributing to the team performance include conflict management, group capabilities, understanding others and decision quality.
• The developed profile of project managers’ competencies, in the big picture, represents blame-free behaviours with a focus on individual productivity as well as supporting and developing others, and joint planning, control and management of the project.
These findings provide novel understanding over project managers’ competencies in collaborative construction projects. The developed profile of competencies needs validation in other contexts as well. Therefore, complementary studies in various regions and business conditions are a potential area for further research.
Abdullah, A H, Yaman, S K, Mohammad, H and Hassan, P F (2018) Construction manager’s technical competencies in Malaysian construction projects, Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 25(2), 153-177.
Ahadzie, D K, Proverbs, D G and Olomolaiye, P (2008) Towards developing competencybased measures for construction project managers: Should contextual behaviours be distinguished from task behaviours? International Journal of Project Management, 26(6), 631-645.
Ahadzie, D K, Proverbs, D G, Olomolaiye, P O and Ankrah, N A (2009) Competencies required by project managers for housing construction in Ghana: Implications for CPD agenda, Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 16(4), 353375.
Ahadzie, D K, Proverbs, D G and Sarkodie-Poku, I (2014) Competencies required of project managers at the design phase of mass house building projects, International Journal of Project Management, 32(6), 958-969.
Chen, P, Partington, D and Wang, J N (2008) Conceptual determinants of construction project management competence: A Chinese perspective, International Journal of Project Management, 26(6), 655-664.
Cheng, M I, Dainty, A R and Moore, D R (2005) What makes a good project manager? Human Resource Management Journal, 15(1), 25-37.
Chang, Y, Eklund, T, Kantola, J I and Vanharanta, H (2009) International creative tension study of university students in South Korea and Finland, Human Factors and Ergonomics in Manufacturing and Service Industries, 19(6), 528-543.
Dainty, A R, Cheng, M I and Moore, D R (2004) A competency‐based performance model for construction project managers, Construction Management and Economics, 22(8), 877-886.
de los Ríos-Carmenado, I, Rahoveanu, A T and Gallegos, A A (2014) Project management competencies for regional development in Romania: Analysis from working with people model, Procedia Economics and Finance, 8, 614-621.
Dogbegah, R, Owusu-Manu, D and Omoteso, K (2011) A principal component analysis of project management competencies for the Ghanaian construction industry, Australasian Journal of Construction Economics and Building, 11(1), 26-40.
Dziekoński, K (2017) Project managers’ competencies model for construction industry in Poland, Procedia Engineering, 182, 174-181.
Edum-Fotwe, F T and McCaffer, R (2000) Developing project management competency:
perspectives from the construction industry, International Journal of Project Management, 18(2), 111-124.
Engebø, A, Lædre, O, Young, B, Larssen, P F, Lohne, J and Klakegg, O J (2020) Collaborative project delivery methods: A scoping review, Journal of Civil Engineering and Management, 26(3), 278-303.
Forbes, L H and Ahmed, S M (2010) Modern Construction: Lean Project Delivery and Integrated Practices, Boca Raton, FL, USA:
Fischer, M, Khanzode, A, Ashcraft, H W and Reed, D (2017) Integrating Project Delivery, Hoboken, NJ, USA: John Wiley and Sons.
Hosseini, A, Wondimu, P A, Bellini, A, Haugseth, N, Andersen, B and Lædre, O (2016) Project partnering in Norwegian construction industry, Energy Procedia, 96, 241-252.
Hwang, B G and Ng, W J (2013) Project management knowledge and skills for green construction: Overcoming challenges, International Journal of Project Management, 31(2), 272-284.
Klendauer, R, Berkovich, M, Gelvin, R, Leimeister, J M and Krcmar, H (2012) Towards a competency model for requirements analysts, Information Systems Journal, 22(6), 475-503.
laili Jabar, I, Ismail, F, Aziz, N M and Janipha, N A I (2013) Construction manager's competency in managing the construction process of IBS projects, Procedia-Social and Behavioural Sciences, 105, 85-93.
Lee, T S, Kim, D H and Lee, D W (2011) A competency model for project construction team and project control team, KSCE Journal of Civil Engineering, 15(5), 781-792.
Liyana Othman, N and Jaafar, M (2013) Personal competency of selected women construction project managers in Malaysia, Journal of Engineering, Design and Technology, 11(3), 276-287.
Liikamaa, K (2015) Developing a project manager’s competencies: A collective view of the most important competencies, Procedia Manufacturing, 3, 681-687.
Lloyd-Walker, B and Walker, D (2015) Collaborative Project Procurement Arrangements, Newtown, PA: Project Management Institute.
Moradi, S, Arbabi, H and Goldust Jouybari, Y (2018, March) Matching Iranian project manager’s competencies to project type (Case study: IT and construction industry projects), In: Proceedings of the International Congress on Science and Engineering, Hamburg, Germany.
Moradi, S, Kähkönen, K and Aaltonen, K (2019) Comparison of research and industry views on project managers’ competencies, International Journal of Managing Projects in Business, 13(3), 543-572.
Moradi, S, Kähkönen, K and Aaltonen, K (2020a) From Past to present-the development of project success research, The Journal of Modern Project Management, 8(1).
Moradi, S, Kähkönen, K and Aaltonen, K (2020b) Project managers’ competencies in collaborative construction projects, Buildings, 10, 50.
Moradi, S, Kähkönen, K, Klakegg, O J and Aaltonen, K (2021) A competency model for the selection and performance improvement of project managers in collaborative construction projects: Behavioural studies in Norway and Finland, Buildings, 11, 4.
Moradi, S (2021) Project Managers' Competencies in Collaborative Construction Projects, Tampere University, Doctoral Thesis, Tampere University.
Mutijwaa, P and Rwelamila, D (2007) Project management competence in public sector infrastructure organisation, Construction Management and Economics, 25(1), 55-66.
Müller, R and Turner, J R (2007) Matching the project manager’s leadership style to project type, International Journal of Project Management, 25(1), 21-32.
Oakland, J S and Marosszeky, M (2017) Total Construction Management: Lean Quality in Construction Project Delivery, Abingdon, UK:
Omar, M N and Fayek, A R (2016) Modelling and evaluating construction project competencies and their relationship to project performance, Automation in Construction, 69, 115-130.
Spencer, M L and Spencer, M S (1993) Competence At Work: Models for Superior
Performance, New York, NY, USA: John Wily and Son, Inc
Shah, M N and Prakash, A (2018) Developing generic competencies for infrastructure managers in India, International Journal of Managing Projects in Business, 11(2), 366-381.
Tabassi, A A, Roufechaei, K M, Ramli, M, Bakar, A H A, Ismail, R and Pakir, A H K (2016) Leadership competences of sustainable construction project managers, Journal of Cleaner Production, 124, 339-349.
Walker, D and Lloyd-Walker, B (2011) Knowledge, skills and attributes of project alliances managers in Australasia. Egbu, C and Lou, E C W (Eds.), Proceedings 27th Annual ARCOM Conference, 5-7 September 2011, Bristol, UK. Association of Researchers in Construction Management, 372-81.
Zhang, F, Zuo, J and Zillante, G (2013) Identification and evaluation of the key social competencies for Chinese construction project managers, International Journal of Project Management, 31(5), 748-759.
Zwell, M (2000) Creating a Culture of Competence, Hoboken, NJ, USA: John Wiley, In
View publication stats
Project Managers' Competencies for Collaborative Construction Projects
