Faculty of Architecture and the Built Environment, Department of Management in the Built Environment, Julianalaan 134, 2628 BL, Delft, Netherlands
An emerging aspect of digital transformation in industry relates to the rise of digital platforms. While examples such as Uber and Airbnb are well-known, technological platforms that seek to coordinate demand and supply-side actors in the architecture, engineering and construction (AEC) sector are also developing. Examples include Wikihouse, Sidewalk Labs, and Bosch IoT Suite. Although there is a growing body of scholarship reviewing the concept of ‘platforms’, far less attention has been paid to reviewing studies of digital platforms in the AEC sector. This systematic review of 18 studies seeks to address this deficiency. The findings show that the focus has hitherto centred on engineering platforms, with researchers adding greater functionality to platforms in order to yield efficiencies in the production process. Current endeavours tend to be laboratory-based, with prototypes still to be tested in the real-world. In contrast to reviews in management and organisational studies, scholars of platforms in construction do not pay as much attention to the power of platforms as a strategic organising principle for coordinating markets. The review thus proposes a number of possible directions for construction management researchers to examine the strategic potential for platforms to drive competitive advantage in the AEC sector.
digital platforms, disruptive innovation, strategy, systematic review
Over the past two decades, technological platforms from the high-tech information technology sector have proliferated. Examples of these platforms can be found in retail (e.g. Amazon), transport (e.g. Uber), hospitality (e.g. Airbnb) and social media (e.g. Recent statistics (see  show how powerful these platforms have become in coordinating markets across the world: for example, in 2019, the ride-sharing platform Uber generated over US$14 billion in net revenue connecting more than 100 million monthly users globally; despite the controversies surrounding data and privacy infringements, the number of Facebook users keeps growing, linking more than 2.5 billion monthly active users in the 4th quarter of 2019 and generating over US$70 billion in revenue that same year. According to Cusumano et al. (2019), this ‘platformania’ is evident in the market value of seven
Chan, P W (2020) Construction in the Platform Society: New Directions for Construction
Management Research In: Scott, L and Neilson, C J (Eds) Proceedings of the 36th Annual
ARCOM Conference, 7-8 September 2020, UK, Association of Researchers in Construction Management, 396-405
platform leaders - Microsoft, Apple, Amazon, Google, Facebook, Alibaba and Tencent represent a total valuation of ~US$5 trillion in 2018.
By contrast, the Top 500 engineering design firms generated just over US$101 billion in 2018 for projects undertaken around the world (ENR, 2019). Indeed, the architecture, engineering and construction (AEC) sector is well known for lagging behind in digital transformation (e.g. the European Commission, 2019). Nevertheless, platforms have also begun to emerge in the AEC sector (see Mosca et al., 2020). Examples include Wikihouse that aims to simplify (and make accessible) the design, manufacture and assembly of high-performance homes ( Sidewalk Labs as part of Alphabet Inc.  (parent company of Google) that uses digital technologies to transform the urban environment ( and Bosch Internet of Things (IoT) Suite, an open-source IoT-based platform that connects in excess of 10 million devices worldwide (
The emergence of digital platforms has heralded a promising era where these instruments lead to disruptive innovation. Platforms that connect users on the demand-side and providers on the supply-side can help address failures in the market, while the rise of the sharing economy can help democratise the production process. Yet, while the term ‘platform’ has become ubiquitous in the business world, until fairly recently, the workings of digital platforms have not been paid sufficient attention in the field of management and organisational studies (Gawer, 2014). A number of critical reviews of the concept of ‘platform’ have since been undertaken to clarify what platforms are, what they do and their effects.
At a very basic level, platforms form the ground or launchpad for driving actions. In computing terms, a platform is the operating system that form the basis for other entities (e.g. software) to run. Thus, for Bogusz et al., (2018), a digital platform is “one digital artefact that mediates as digital entrepreneurs build their venture”. It is through this technological entity that value creation happens by facilitating providers on the one hand, and users on the other (Leong et al., 2019). Such entities, as Dolata (2019) explained, can be characterised as “digital, data-based, and algorithmically structuring socio-technical infrastructures that exchange information, coordinate communication or organize work, offer a wide range of services, or distribute digital and non-digital products” (p. 183).
Platforms are not just stable structures that simply act as intermediaries that broker relationships between demand-side users and supply-side providers. Scholars have begun to recognise that platforms go beyond facilitating two-sided benefits to consider how platforms dynamically shape and are shaped by network-level, multi-sided innovation effects (see Gawer, 2014). That is, for platforms to thrive, the platform owners must constantly grow its pool of users; to do so, platforms must not only attract more parties on both sides, but also develop integrative dynamic capabilities (Helfat and Raubitschek, 2018) and innovate themselves to in turn drive innovation among and across the parties to stimulate complementary innovations, which in return increases the value of the platform (Gawer and Cusumano, 2014). To illustrate this virtuous cycle, take Uber as an example. Its success was initially based on attracting more users to its platforms, both passengers and drivers, some of whom also play the dual role of a passenger and a driver. As it evolved, Uber used its digital infrastructure and algorithmic capability to diversify its offerings by attracting other complementary products such as Uber Eats, its restaurant/take-away delivery service.
Thus, in a platform society, social and economic relations are increasingly mediated through an ecosystem of interconnected digital platforms (de Waal et al., 2017). In this ecosystem, processes of datafication to capture and circulate value representations, the commodification of value propositions to translate into tradeable entities, and the curation of value offerings to provide mass personalisation are the core mechanisms of the platform infrastructure (van Dijck et al., 2018). As Grabher and van Tuijl (2020) noted, platform organisation serves to disrupt traditional production-based industrialisation by driving paradigm shifts in four main areas: A shift in value from one that revolves around ownership of assets to the ownership of access, a shift in governance from decisions surrounding make-or-buy to decisions to employ-or-enable, a shift from managing the back-end (supply side of making things) to managing the front-end (demand side of making matches), and a shift in labour from jobs to gigs.
To date, the concept of platforms has been reviewed mainly in business-to-customer
(B2C) contexts - for instance, in healthcare (e.g. Islind et al., 2019), financial services (Kazan et al., 2018), (social) media and gaming (e.g. Rietveld et al., 2019) - far less attention has been paid to reviewing platforms in business-to-business (B2B) contexts (Grabher and van Tuijl, 2020).
The construction sector is one such candidate for examining how platform organising works (or not) in a B2B context. This article therefore seeks to address this deficiency by systematically reviewing how platforms in construction have been studied. In so doing, this review finds that current studies on platforms-based organising in construction have tended to focus on engineering greater functionality of platforms, often based on building information modelling (BIM). In so doing, current studies ignore more strategic concerns of market coordination through digital platforms. Thus, this article concludes with future directions for construction management research to study the full range of problems and prospects of platforms as a disruptor to the status quo.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW OF PLATFORMS IN CONSTRUCTION
Unlike conventional narrative reviews, systematic reviews which originated from the medical and health sciences is a thorough and transparent way of mapping and evaluating the evidence in a particular topic area (Tranfield et al., 2003). Figure 1 below illustrates the process used to systematically review all the relevant studies on digital platforms in construction.
Two databases were consulted for the searches on 17 March 2020, including Web of Science and Scopus. The following keywords were used in the subject topic, title and abstract fields: (“platformi*” OR “digital platform*”) AND (“construction” OR “building” OR “built environment”). The choice of selecting “platformi*” as opposed to “platform*” was due to the fact that choosing the latter yielded results that had little to do with digital platforms, e.g., ‘oil and gas platforms’. Therefore, given how scholars who study the development of digital platforms outside of construction have recognised the importance of their dynamic evolution and the process of
platformisation (Islind et al., 2019), a choice was made to include a keyword search of
“platformi*”. The initial search yielded 516 hits, including 197 hits on Web of Science and 319 hits on Scopus. By limiting the search to peer-reviewed journal articles published in English, the sample was then reduced to 113 articles on Web of Science and 148 articles on Scopus.
Process flowchart for the systematic review
A screening process was then undertaken by scanning through the title and abstracts of each article to establish relevance to construction and the production of the built environment. Those that were not directly related were eliminated, as were those that were found to be duplicated across both databases. This resulted in 45 studies selected for full review. Each of these 45 studies was then read fully to analyse the research question, method and key finding contained in each study. Through this process, a further 27 studies were eliminated; 25 of these studies were found not to relate specifically to the production of the built environment whilst 2 studies were not published in peer-reviewed journals. The remaining 18 studies - 12 that are directly associated with the production of the built environment and a further 6 that are related to the built environment more generally - therefore constituted the final sample of studies analysed for the review presented here.
Tables 1 and 2 below summarise the research questions, methods and findings of the 18 studies analysed in this review. Thirteen studies were published since 2018, indicating that digital platforms represent a nascent object of study in the field. The analysis reveals distinct interests between studies that are directly associated with the production of the built environment (Table 1) and studies that are related more generally to the built environment (Table 2). The former tends to be about technical developments (8 out of 12 studies), whereas the latter is more concerned about engagement with networks of end-users and citizens (4 out of 6 studies). Moreover, the central platform for studies connected with the production of the built environment is building information modelling (BIM) (7 out of 12 studies), whereas platforms that capture end-user or citizen experience tend to be the object of concern in more general studies about the built environment.
Tool-based focus: Designing functionality for production efficiency
Unsurprisingly, when it comes to studying platforms for the production of the built environment, the focus has been tool-based. Researchers have mainly considered how platforms can better support integration of information between the phases of design, construction and asset/facilities management. For example, using agent-based modelling, Fioravanti et al., (2018) regarded BIM as the central platform that can be enhanced by introducing relational rules and goals that can enable better collaboration, communication and coordination between design and construction management and facilities management. Similarly, Di Tonno (2019), building on the Plan-Do-CheckAct cycle, also viewed BIM as the central basis for integrating project monitoring with information and communication technologies and enterprise resource planning during the operational life of a built asset.
Table 1 Summary of studies connected with the production of the built environment.
BIM can act as the central platform for enhancements in technical functions or features. One example of added functionality is the use of BIM as a conduit to link the cyber and physical worlds. For instance, McMeel (2019) conceptualised a platform ecosystem that combined augmented reality with robotics. Ness et al., (2019) developed a prototype that facilitated data exchange that can enable circular building processes in which reusable building component can be identified, tracked and managed. Others have proposed a life-cycle information transformation framework (Succar and Poirier, 2020). Furthermore, functionalities that allow the capture of building information beyond the technical have also be introduced, e.g., in adding geographic information to facilitate better coordination between architects and urban planners (e.g. Baydar et al., 2018), or historical information to support preservation of heritage buildings (e.g. Fadli and AlSaeed, 2019). What these studies have in common is the assumption that these added technical functions are able to facilitate better integration between different professional stakeholder groups. That said, a recent survey by Li et al. (2019) suggests that platforms only serve to support engagement between stakeholders who are already familiar with one another rather than with parties who are less familiar but who would bring about more creative ideas.
The tool-based approach is also problematic for a number of reasons. First, 10 out of the 12 studies relating to the production of the built environment are researcher-led, rather than practice-led. Thus, these are conceptualisations of frameworks and models that are developed in the ‘laboratory’, rather than trialled and tested in the real-world. The utility of these tools is therefore questionable at this point. Second, and more critically, Mahalingam’s et al. (2015) comparative study of two metro projects in India showed that when the focus lies squarely on tools, then project participants are not likely to use these actively in everyday decision-making. Rather, project participants must first radically transform their practices and bring in new players in order to stimulate fresh questions and perspectives; only then will the usefulness of the platform (e.g. in visualisations of new, unfamiliar perspectives) be put to work.
Table 1 Continued.,
Beyond the tool: Broadening participation and involving the unfamiliar
When reviewing the 6 studies that are more generally connected with the built environment, the focus moves away from the usefulness of the tool to examining how platforms can be used to better engage with a broad range of users. These platforms either captures user experiences of the built environment (e.g. Chan and Cope, 2015; Abdelmonem et al., 2017), or about capturing the requirements of users and citizens (e.g. de Waal et al., 2017; Bakardjieva, 2019). Thus, while the focus of the 12 studies relating to the production of the built environment emphasised more the design and construction aspects, 5 out of the 6 studies in this category emphasised the role platforms can play in enhancing the use and experience of the built environment.
Summary of studies relating more generally to the built environment
Instead of affording production efficiencies, the focus of studies to date that are more generally related to the built environment has been geared towards extending the network of players and enabling knowledge co-production and sharing. Thus, these studies tend to be much closer to studies of platforms in management and organisational studies, where attention is paid to examine network-level effects as the platform is used by a growing number of users. Within this group of studies, dynamics of competition and collaboration also feature. For example, when comparing between different digital platforms used to shape citizen participation, Bakardjieva (2019) found that the effectiveness of platforms to engage is dependent on its legitimacy; in collaborative settings participants must feel that their voices matter to those with the power to make a difference in decision-making, whereas in contested settings platforms must demonstrate a legal basis for engagement. Platforms are thus not just digital instruments that broker relationships, but also an entity that dynamically evolves in an ecosystem - comprising both digital and physical elements - that shape and are shaped by user engagements (de Waal et al., 2017).
While there have been a growing number of reviews on digital platforms in management and organisational studies (e.g. Gawer, 2014; Helfat and Raubitschek, 2018; Grabher and van Tuijl, 2020), far less has been done to review the concept of platforms in the AEC sector. The aim of this article has thus addressed this gap by presenting a systematic review of 18 studies relevant to the (production of the) built environment. The review found that studies on digital platforms in the AEC sector have mainly focussed on engineering better functionalities in platforms, often utilising BIM as the central basis for adding new technical features with the explicit or implicit intention of integrating multiple stakeholders across the whole life cycle of the built asset. This quest for integration is not new, and platforms are emerging as a new organising tool for facilitating better communication and coordination.
However, by treating platforms as a tool, current research in the AEC sector fails to consider the full potential for platforms to dynamically shape and be shaped by the market. It is here that previous reviews from management and organisational studies can provide some clues for possible future directions for construction management researchers interested in examining the workings of platforms to radically transform the AEC sector (see also Thomas et al., 2014). Here, three possibilities are proposed. First, future research could shift the attention away from the constant drive to introduce, update and refine new features of enhancing platform functionality to examining how platforms (and especially platform leaders) create, sustain and grow the number and range of users engaging with the platforms and related innovation capabilities. In so doing, future research can find a balance between the current skewed focus on engineering more functional platforms and the currently-lacking analysis of the dynamics of platform ecosystems and the markets, thereby paying more attention to questions around the dynamic capabilities of platforms (Gawer, 2014; Helfat and Raubitschek, 2018) as they occupy a more strategic position in the ecosystem of incumbents and disruptors in the AEC sector.
Second, by moving towards a more strategic orientation, attention is also turned away from questions of production efficiency to the creation and curation of value. In a recent study of gaming platforms, Rietveld et al., (2019) found that it is not always the ‘best in class’ that thrives in the platform ecosystem. Rather, it is about the kinds of value that sustains and grows complementary solutions for the users on all sides and the platform owners. Thus, the mindset needs to shift from finding the most technically optimal, to asking what kinds of (added) value platforms bring in engaging with different and novel players in the AEC sector, and to what (better) impacts.
Third, and finally, while platforms tend to be regarded as (more or less) stable entities in existing research in the AEC sector, there is a need to examine more processually what platforms do in everyday practices. Islind et al., (2019) point to the idea of platformisation, as opposed to platforms, to stress the importance of understanding platform development as a process rather than an end-goal. In so doing, there is a need to examine the boundaries and boundary work involved within platforms, between platforms and users, and among users (Leong et al., 2019) as the platform society orchestrates the AEC markets of/in the future.
Abdelmonem, M G, Selim, G, Mushatat, S and Almogren, A (2017) Virtual platforms for heritage preservation in the Middle East: The case of Medieval Cairo, International Journal of Architectural Research, 11(3), 28-41.
Bakardjieva, M (2019) A tale of three platforms: Collaboration, contestation and degrees of audibility in a Bulgarian e-Municipality, International Journal of Communication, 13, 5652-5670.
Baydar, G, Komesli, M, Yilmaz, A and Kilinç, K (2018) Digitizing Lefebvre’s spatial triad, Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 33(1), 6-20.
Bogusz, C, Teigland, R and Vaast, E (2019) Designed entrepreneurial legitimacy: The case of a Swedish crowdfunding platform, European Journal of Information Systems, 28(3), 318-335.
Chan, S and Cope, A (2015) Strategies against architecture: Interactive media and transformative technology at the Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum, Curator, 58(3), 353-368.
Cusumano, M A, Gawer, A and Yoffie, D B (2019) The Business of Platforms: Strategy in the Age of Digital Competition, Innovation and Power, New York: Harper Collins.
de Waal, M, de Lange, M and Bouw, M (2017) The hackable city: Citymaking in a platform society, Architectural Design, 87(1), 50-57.
Di Ludovico, D and Fabietti, V (2018) Strategic environmental assessment, key issues of its effectiveness: The results of the Speedy Project, Environmental Impact Assessment Review, 68, 19-28.
Di Tonno, C (2019) Smart models for new management of the building process, Techne: Journal of Technology for Architecture and Environment, 18, 246-253.
ENR (2019) ENR Top 500 Design Firms: The Market Keeps Growing, 25 April, Available from  [Accessed 17 March 2020].
European Commission (2019) Supporting Digitalisation of the Construction Sector and SMEs Including Building Information Modelling, October.
Fadli, F and AlSaeed, M (2019) Digitizing vanishing architectural heritage; The design and development of Qatar historic buildings information modelling [Q-HBIM] platform, Sustainability, 11(9), 2501-2526.
Fioravanti, A, Novembri, G and Rossini, F L (2018) A theoretical framework to align lean construction techniques in the 4.0 building industry, Ricerche e Progetti per il Territorio la Citta el Architettura, 10(4).
Gawer, A (2014) Bridging differing perspectives on technological platforms: Toward an integrative framework, Research Policy, 43(7), 1239-1249.
Gawer, A and Cusumano, M A (2014) Industry platforms and ecosystem innovation, Journal of Product Innovation Management, 31(3), 417-433.
Grabher, G and van Tuijl, E (2020) Uber-production: From global networks to digital platforms, Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space, 52(5), 1005-1016.
Helfat, C E and Raubitschek, R S (2018) Dynamic and integrative capabilities for profiting from innovation in digital platform-based ecosystems, Research Policy, 47(8), 13911399.
Honic, M, Kovacic, I, Sibenik, G and Rechberger, H (2019) Data and stakeholder management framework for the implementation of BIM-based material passports, Journal of Building Engineering, 23, 341-350.
Islind, A S, Lindroth, R, Lundin, J and Steineck, G (2019) Co-designing a digital platform with boundary objects: Bringing together heterogeneous users in healthcare, Health and Technology, 9(4), 425-438.
Kazan, E, Tan, C, Lim, E T K, Sørensen, C and Damsgaard, J (2018) Disentangling digital platform competition: The case of UK mobile payment platforms, Journal of Management Information Systems, 35(1), 180-219.
Kenney, M, Rouvinen, P, Seppälä, T and Zysman, J (2019) Platforms and industrial change, Industry and Innovation, 26(8), 871-879.
Leong, C, Pan, S L, Leidner, D E and Huang, J-S (2019) Platform leadership: Managing boundaries for the network growth of digital platforms, Journal of The Association for Information Systems, 20(10), 1531-1565.
Li, Y, Ding, R, Cui, L, Lei, Z and Mou, J (2019) The impact of sharing economy practices on sustainability performance in the Chinese construction industry, Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 150, 104409.
Mahalingam, A, Yadav, A K and Varaprasad, J (2015) Investigating the role of lean practices in enabling BIM adoption: Evidence from two Indian cases, Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 141(7), 5015006.
McMeel, D (2019) Robots and AR: Towards a platform economy for construction, Journal of Information Technology in Construction, 24, 527-539.
Mosca, L, Jones, K, Davies, A., Whyte, J and Glass, J (2020) Platform Thinking for Construction, Digest Series, No.  2, London: Transforming Construction Network Plus.
Ness, D, Xing, K, Kim, K and Jenkins, A (2019) An ICT-enabled product service system for reuse of building components, IFAC-Papers Online, 52(13), 761-766.
Rashid, M M and Antlej, K (2020) Geospatial platforms and immersive tools for social cohesion: The 4D narrative of architecture of Australia's Afghan Cameleers, Virtual Archaeology Review, 11(22), 74-84.
Rietveld, J, Schilling, M A and Bellavitis (2019) Platform strategy: Managing ecosystem value through selective promotion of complements, Organization Science, 30(6), 1232-1251.
Saygi, G, Agugiaro, G and Hamamcioglu-Turan, M (2018) Behind the 3D scene: A GIS approach for managing the chronological information of historic buildings, Multimodal Technologies and Interaction, 2(2).
Shah, K (2016) Creation of cultural heritage inventories: case of the historic city of Ahmadabad, Journal of Cultural Heritage Management and Sustainable Development, 6(2), 166-194.
Succar, B and Poirier, E (2020) Life-cycle information transformation and exchange for delivering and managing digital and physical assets, Automation in Construction, 112, 103090.
Thomas, L.  D.  W., Autio, E.  and Gann, D.  M.  (2014) Architectural leverage: Putting platforms in context, Academy of Management Perspectives, 28(2), 198-219.
Tranfield, D, Denyer, D and Smart, P (2003) Towards a methodology for developing evidence-informed management knowledge by means of systematic review, British Journal of Management, 14(3), 207-222.
Van Dijck, J, Poell, T and de Waal, M (2018) The Platform Society: Public Values in a Connective World, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Construction in the Platform Society
