Contractor development in Nigeria: perceptions of contractors and professionals
To cite this article: Olugboyega Adams (1997) Contractor development in Nigeria: perceptions of contractors and professionals, Construction Management & Economics, 15: 1, 95-108, DOI:
To link to this article:
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
Construction Management and Economics (1997) 15, 95± 108
Contractor development in Nigeria: perceptions of contractors and professionals
Department of Building Studies, School of the Built Environment, De Montfort University Leicester, The Gateway, Leicester LE1 9BH, UK.
Received 3 August 1995; accepted 29 February 1996
Foreign construction ® rms dominate the major projects in most developing countries as a result of de® ciencies in indigenous construction capacity. A plethora of measures have been formulated and implemented to promote development of domestic contractors in these countries, but most attempts have achieved little success. This paper, arising from a larger study on management training needs of contractors in Nigeria, describes ® ndings on constraints on indigenous contractors’ performance in the Nigerian industry. Contractordevelopment programmes perceived as relevant and appropriate to improve their performance in the industry are also reported. The views of indigenous contractors and professionals were compared. There was a strong agreement between both groups on the major constraints in the industry and on the measures perceived as most important for the development of Nigerian contractors. Problems emanating from the business environment were generally perceived by both groups as the most severe constraints. Contractor-development programmes, perceived as very important by both groups, are also the measures required to ameliorate the most important constraints identi® ed: obtaining interim payments, uncertainties in supplies and prices of materials, inadequate access to capital, plant and equipment. Contractor development is inevitably an integral part of a construction industry development programme, given the nature of constraints and development needs emphasized by both groups. The focus therefore should be on establishing a comprehensive programme for the development of the construction industry. More attention should be placed on contractor training to promote management development of trained construction professionals, now emerging as the new crop of construction entrepreneurs.
Contractor development, developing countries, Nigeria, SMEs, industry development
Introduction
De® ciencies in indigenous construction capacity in developing countries have resulted in an unwholesome dependence on imported inputs: construction materials, machinery, and the skilled manpower required to implement much-needed infrastructure for economic growth and to improve living conditions. Foreign construction ® rms dominate the construction industry in most developing countries, executing ± almost exclusively ± major construction works. The literature is replete with details of de® ciencies in these countries (e.g. Ofori, 1980; Edmonds and Miles, 1984; Andrews, 1985; Wells, 1986; Kirmani, 1988).
international development agencies, such as the World Bank (1984), the United Nations Centre for Human Settlement (UNCHS) (1981, 1984a, 1984b), and the International Labour Of® ce (ILO) (1987), have shown considerable interest and have made signi® cant contributions towards the development of domestic contractors in developing countries.
The intractable foreign debt and balance-of-payment problems of most developing countries have drastically reduced their import capacity, economic growth and infrastructure development programmes. Wells (1985) rightly warned of the need for developing economies to concentrate upon the development of an indigenous construction capacity, as reduced foreign-exchange earnings and international recession would limit the production of the capital goods required to maintain economic growth in these countries. A decline in oil revenue, and foreign debt problems, forced the Federal Republic of Nigeria to put in place a structural adjustment programme (SAP) to revamp the economy. SAP has enhanced local sourcing of inputs, mainly because of a lack of foreign exchange for imports, and the depreciation of the local currency (Ojo, 1989). SAP should also precipitate a more concerted effort towards the development of the indigenous construction industry, to curtail dependence on imported capacity in the provision of much-needed infrastructure, required to improve living conditions. The primary concern should be establishing appropriate development programmes to ensure sustainable development of domestic contractors, and to promote their effective participation in the local construction industry, thus reducing dependence on imports. This paper identi® es constraints on indigenous contractors in Nigeria, and the most appropriate supports required to promote their development and effective participation in the local industry.
A plethora of measures have been formulated and implemented to promote domestic contractor development in developing countries. The ILO (1987) classi® ed under three headings measures that are proposed for small contractor development in developing countries:
3. policies and programmes for training and technical advice.
Policies to improve small contractors’ access to work include: planning and formulating public sector demand to minimize abrupt ¯ uctuations in ¯ ow of work; price preferences to override the competitive advantage of larger foreign ® rms in submitting lower bids; and more ef® cient pre-quali® cation to promote competence and discipline. Other initiatives include: encouraging larger ® rms to subcontract more work; providing incentives for small ® rms to merge to form larger, more viable ® rms; splitting a single large contract into smaller segments which small ® rms have the capacity to handle; and reducing the direct labour force. Other measures are: improved tendering procedures, so as to increase tendering opportunities; standardization of design to facilitate skill development, and hence improve the ability to compete; and simpli® cation of tender documents to ease process and technical details.
Policies recommended by ILO (1987) to improve contractors’ business environment include various measures to improve their access to ® nance, such as the provision of mobilization advances, the reduction of retention money, prompt payment for work done, and other measures such as provision of loans or loan guarantee schemes to reduce demand for working capital. Other essential measures include improving small contractors’ access to materials, plant and equipment.
It has been observed that the ailments of the construction industry in developing countries are only symptoms of the underlying problems of weak enterprise management (World Bank, 1984). Although training is not prescribed as the panacea to all problems facing contractors in developing countries, it is often chief among programmes recommended for their development in these countries (ILO, 1987). It is also regarded as the single major solution to their dif® culties (Hernes, 1988). Very little success has been recorded in most contractor-training programmes (Edmonds and Miles, 1984), though a few successful programmes have been reported (Miles and Neale, 1991).
Ofori (1991) noted that initiating a contractordevelopment programme is becoming almost synonymous with establishing a contractor-support agency. The package of support measures available varies from agency to agency, and usually includes those aforementioned. Most of these agencies have made little impact, or have had only modest success (Edmonds and Miles, 1984; Andrews, 1985; Ofori, 1991). They are in most instances government-sponsored institutions with a bureaucratic structure that frustrates their ef® ciency and effectiveness. Small contractors are also encouraged and supported to mobilize themselves into a formidable association for self-help activities. Andrews (1990) and Ofori (1991) recommended that a contractors’ association should be more actively involved in the formulation and implementation of contractor development programmes. The ILO (1987) advocated that a contractors’ association could take on some of the functions and services of a contractor development agency; Edmonds and Miles (1984) and Ofori (1991) further recommended that it should gradually take over the running of the agency.
There is, however, little evidence that small contractors are actively involved in the formulation of programmes intended for their bene® t in most developing countries. This has probably contributed to the failures of previous programmes, in particular lack of motivation for training (Edmonds and Miles, 1984).
In addition, most attempts have achieved little because they were based on programmes that worked in the industrialized countries; they also concentrated on the symptoms and not the root causes (Ofori, 1991). Studies have con® rmed that the problems of small contractors in developing countries cannot be generalized at the same level of severity, though similar problems exist in most countries (Karming et al., l994). This underlines the importance of intensive need analysis to diagnose the speci® c needs of the particular industry rather than prescriptive contractor development programmes. However, little information is available on how to undertake an effective need analysis to establish a successful contractordevelopment scheme.
Indigenous Nigerian construction ® rms are predominantly small and medium-sized; their participation in major construction works is very marginal. The larger indigenous construction ® rms are small enterprises relative to most indigenized foreign ® rms that dominate the industry. It was estimated that indigenous construction ® rms undertake only 5% of the purely civil engineering construction and 25% of the building works, while indigenized foreign ® rms undertake not less than 85% of the civil and building construction combined (FRN, 1991).The indigenized foreign ® rms are former foreign ® rms that now have between 40 and 60% Nigerian equity ownership as a result of government indigenization policies. However, expatriates still dominate both the management and the technical functions of most of these ® rms.
Some efforts have been made to promote indigenous contractors and increase their participation in the industry. They were primarily measures to increase access to work and provision of ® nancial support. However, these programmes have not been successful (Adams, 1993). They were often abused, and invariably failed in their objectives. Concerted effort to ensure an integrated development of the industry was generally lacking. In addition, contractor development was attempted in isolation, in the absence of a more comprehensive programme for the development of the industry, as other measures proposed for integrated development of domestic construction capacity (FRN, 1981) were not implemented, owing to lack of political will. The National Construction Policy (FRN, 1991) is the ® rst real indication, in the author’s opinion, of genuine government interest in the development of domestic construction capacity. The policy effectively addressed the major dif® culties faced in the industry: lack of construction materials, manpower, equipment and ® nance. However, the policy failed to address speci® cally the issue of contractor development. Policy strategies recommended are not explicit or concerted enough to ensure sustainable development of indigenous contractors.
Research objectives
The objectives of this study are to identify the constraints on indigenous contractors in Nigeria, and to determine the most appropriate supports to promote their development and effective participation in the local industry. It is premised that the take-up and subsequent success of any contractor-development initiative depend on contractors, the intended bene® ciaries, perceiving proposed programmes as relevant and appropriate to their needs. The perceptions of contractors (owner-managers of indigenous construction ® rms) on the relative importance of the constraints and contractor-development programmes are identi® ed. The views of experts in the industry ± that is, construction professionals (architects, engineers, quantity surveyors and construction owners’ representatives) ± on these issues are also surveyed. Both groups are surveyed, to assess views across the industry. Hernes (1988) opined that the latter group would be more objective in judging contractors’ performance and needs. The information obtained from both groups is integrated in order to identify the most appropriate contractor-development needs in the Nigerian industry.
Need analysis
McKillip (1987) de® nes needs as value judgements that a target group has problems that can be solved. A problem is de® ned as a difference or discrepancy between what is (or will be) actually happening and what should (or might) be happening (Kubr and Prokopenko, 1991). It is also an inadequate outcome, or an outcome that violates expectations (McKillip, 1987). Thus problems are identi® ed or diagnosed by comparison of what is with what ought to be. Needs are solutions to address the problems identi® ed.
The problem of bias in need analysis is recognized, however (Rogers, 1992). This seems inevitable. The range of stakeholders involved in assessing intervention needs includes professionals, policymakers, and the potential recipients of services. They may have potentially differing perspectives in the de® nition of problems, and hence varying perspectives on needs (Rossi and Freeman, 1993). What is seen as a problem by some persons or groups may not be perceived as such by others.
Judgements of needs could be based on the target population’s expectations (felt need) or utilization of services (expressed need), experts’ opinion (normative need), or expectation based on the performance of a model group (comparative need) (McKillip, 1987). However, judgements of needs can never be absolute. They are value loaded and relative: they vary from context to context, and change over time (Rogers, 1992). There is therefore a real danger of misjudgement. Thus needs based on experts’ expectations can lead to elitist programmes that the target population do not want. Studies have repeatedly shown that small business owner-managers display considerable resentment to pre-packaged, `this is what is best for you’ development schemes (Curran, 1993). On the other hand, felt or expressed needs of the target population could be self-serving and unrealistic. Felt needs depend on the target group’s level of awareness of their de® ciencies, which can arise only by comparing themselves with a known situation. It is always dif® cult to distinguish between felt needs and wants, as they tend to overlap. Rogers (1992) argued that a want is only one of many ways of meeting a need, and it could be selfserving. Expressed needs are indicated by the target group’s use of services that are currently available (McKillip, 1987). Utilization of a service may probably be to maintain a status quo, and not necessarily because the service is the most appropriate solution. Comparative needs are based on the similarity of expectations of a comparison group and that of the target group. There is a danger of imposing externally perceived needs on the target group, as comparative needs assume comparability of groups and ignore the unique characteristics of each group, which invalidate generalizations (McKillip, 1987). As the techniques employed for need analysis will in¯ uence the acceptability, ef® ciency and effectiveness of the solution proposed, and hence the success of the development process, the importance of correct diagnosis of needs of a target group cannot be overemphasized.
The ILO (1987) stressed the importance of a thorough need analysis to identify the major dif® culties faced by domestic contractors in the local construction market in which they operate. A wide variety of methods can be used in systematic evaluation of the problems and needs of a target group for purposive, organized intervention programmes. The methods vary in their complexity, costs and diagnostic accuracy. They include resource inventory, use analysis, social indicator analyses, surveys and structured groups.
(1987) recommended the use of multiple methods to reduce bias and increase accuracy. This is similar to the approach recommended by Hernes (1988) for identifying contractor training needs. He recommended that information should be obtained from contractors themselves, from independent construction consultants, who work in the industry, and from clients’ supervisory staff, who work closely with contractors. He opined that the last two groups would probably be more objective in judging contractors’ performance. Rossi and Freeman (1993) argued that information collected from varying perspectives on needs may eliminate rancorous con¯ ict that may arise, may lead to a reconceptualization of the problem or of the prospective solution, or may even indicate the advisability of abandoning the programme.
Surveys are very popular methods for gathering information for need identi® cation and assessment as they allow inputs from various sources ± clients, key informants and target populations ± and help to build consensus for solutions (McKillip, 1987). Two sets of self-administered questionnaires were developed and used for the study. The ® rst questionnaire was used to collect information from indigenous contractors (the target population). They are owner-managers of construction ® rms wholly owned by Nigerians, operating in the formal sector of the industry. The other questionnaire was used for professionals, who included independent consultants as well as clients’ representatives (key informants and clients). Both questionnaires consisted of similar open-ended and closed questions on the personal characteristics of respondents and their opinion on 26 constraint items, and the relevance to the Nigerian industry of 20 contractor development items derived mainly from programmes proposed by the ILO (1987). The verbal ratings of the end-points of the six-point numerical rating scale used were indicated (1 for not very important and 6 for very important). Draft questionnaires were discussed with a British expert and four Nigerian researchers. They were also pretested on ® ve Nigerian contractors and professionals respectively to check the suitability and appropriateness of the questions .
A total of 400 questionnaires, comprising 200 of each set of questionnaires, were sent to Nigerian indigenous contractors and construction professionals in three south-western states in Nigeria: Lagos, Oyo and Ogun. Lagos is the commercial nerve-centre of Nigeria, where the majority of companies have their national headquarters. Questionnaires were delivered by hand to samples of respective groups selected by non-random sampling techniques. Lack of comprehensive lists of contractors from which accurate sampling frames could be developed necessitated the use of non-probability sampling techniques. Purposive, convenience and snowballing sampling techniques were used. Key professionals employed by major public and private clients were identi® ed and used as agents to reach other professionals as well as contractors (snowballing) for inclusion in the sample. Only indigenous contractors known to be actively involved in construction business were selected (purposive sampling) to avoid the experience of the Federal Of® ce of Statistics (1982), when many contractors on the list of the Federal Works Registration Board could not be traced in the ® eld. Contractors available on the researchers’ unscheduled visits to contractors’ head of® ces, construction sites or professionals’ of® ces were also included in the sample (convenience or accidental sampling).
A total of 140 questionnaires were returned:
35% of the total sent out. This was made up of
69 from contractors (34.5% of the number sent) and 71 from professionals (35.5% of the number sent). The survey was conducted at a time when the industry was overtly concerned about completing on-going government contracts and obtaining payments prior to a change from military to civilian government. This probably in¯ uenced response rates.
Presentation and analysis of results
Frequency distribution of responses based on actual responses, excluding no and missing responses, are used to report the characteristics of respondents. Percentage responses of the importance of the variables (constraints of indigenous contractors and contractor development measures) on the six-point scale are presented. However, responses were collapsed into three groups: 1 or 2, 3 or 4, and 5 or 6, for convenience in data presentation. A rating of 1 or 2 implies that the variable is not perceived as important; 3 or 4 means it is marginally important; while 5 or 6 means it is very important. An importance index is used to rank the relative importance of each variable. This could be expressed mathematically as:
Where a is the weighting, ranging from 1 to 6, given to each variable; A is the highest weight, that is, 6; f is the frequency of the response; and F is the total number of respondents. When a tie occurs, ranking is in accordance with the percentage of respondents rating the variable as very important (i.e. 5 or 6). A low importance index indicates that the variable is perceived to be of a low importance, while a high importance index indicates a high importance.
For simplicity, the rank agreement factor (Aniekwu and Okpala, 1987, 1988; Okpala and Aniekwu, 1988) was used to measure quantitatively the agreement in the ranking between the contractors and professionals. A rank agreement factor is de® ned as:
RAmax is de® ned as
The percentage agreement, PA, is
while the percentage disagreement, PD, is
where for any two groups, the rank of the ith item by group 1 is Ri1 and group 2 is Ri2; i = 1, 2, . . ., N; j = N ± i + 1. RA can be greater than 1; a lower value implies a closer agreement between the two groups, while a factor of zero implies perfect agreement, and complete disagreement would give RAmax.
McKillip (1987) recommended the use of multiattribute utility analysis (MAUA) for integrating information from various sources. It is used to synthesize the results of needs assessment from the contractors and the professionals. The importance index obtained from each group is rescaled to utility values (utilities) that range from 0.0 to 1.0 to re¯ ect and indicate the extent of need. The lowest attribute score is assigned a utility of 0.0, and the highest is assigned 1.0. Utility values of intermediate scores are equal to
where nij is the utility value of option i on attribute j, X is the intermediate attribute score, L is the score of attribute j assigned the utility of 0.0, and H is the score of attribute j assigned 1.0.
Weights, wj, are assigned to attributes to re¯ ect the relevance of the source of information. The most important attribute is assigned a weight of 100, and the weights assigned to other attributes re¯ ect their relative importance: the larger the weight, the more relevant the attribute. Weights are standardized by adding all weights and dividing each weight by this sum:
wj 5	Raw weight for attribute	(6)
Sum of all importance weights
Need index, Ni, ranges from 0.0, indicating no evidence of need, to 1.0, indicating the maximum plausible evidence of need. The need index Ni for each option i is equal to the sum over all attributes of the product of the weight of the attribute, wj, and the utility of the attribute score for the option, nij.
Characteristics of contractors responding to the questionnaire
Two women were among the 69 contractor respondents. The respondents are all owner-managers of their respective ® rms. The age distribution of the sample was mostly between 25 and 54; the mean age was 41 and the modal age group was 35± 44 years. Sixty-two per cent of respondents were under 45 years. Eightythree per cent had formal education beyond secondary school level while 75% had construction quali® cations and 44% had degree and postgraduate quali® cations. Fifty-eight per cent of the contractors sampled had less than 25 employees. Further analysis showed that 74% of the sample had at least one other management staff apart from the owner-manager. Sixty-two per cent of the respondents have been in business for less than ten years. Fifty-® ve per cent operated as limited liability companies, while the rest of the respondents were sole proprietorships (23%) or partnerships (22%). The average number of owners in partnerships or limited liability companies was found to be 3. Seventy-two per cent of respondents indicated that they were involved in both building and civil engineering works, while 86% were registered to tender for small/medium-sized contracts valued under 2 million Naira (1 Naira was equivalent to $1.50 in 1982 when the contractor registration categories was last reviewed). Sixty-six per cent of contractors sampled indicated that new works predominated their works, while government was the main client of the majority (56%). Fifty-seven per cent were involved in other business activities, including 33% who were involved in other construction-related businesses: mainly construction consultancy, materials supplies and retailing.
Characteristics of the professionals
Respondents included a good cross-section of professionals in the construction industry. All the respondents had tertiary education, with 26%, 28%, 27% and
19% having quali® cations in building, architecture, engineering and quantity surveying respectively. Seventy per cent had degree quali® cations, while 80% were corporate members of their respective professional bodies. About 90% had seven years’ or more experience in the industry, including 60% with over 10 years’ experience and 10% with over 25 years’ experience. All respondents had worked closely with at least one indigenous contractor, and 62% had worked closely with ® ve or more indigenous contractors in the past ® ve years. Thirty-two of the respondents indicated employment in the public sector while an equal number were employed in the private sector.
Major constraints on indigenous contractors’ performance
Respondents’ perceptions of the impact of 26 variables on the performance of indigenous contractors in the Nigerian industry are presented in Table 1. The four most important constraints identi® ed by both groups were uncertainties in supplies and prices of materials, obtaining payments, procuring work, and access to capital. Earlier studies (Wahab, 1977; Aniekwu and Okpala, 1987, 1988; Dlakwa and Culpin, 1990) also identi® ed these variables as the major dif® culties in the industry. Other major constraints perceived by both groups included procuring and maintaining plant and equipment, and meeting contract deadlines. Additional constraints (importance index greater than 50) identi® ed by the professionals related to personal de® ciencies of contractors, while those identi® ed by the contractors related to problems emanating from the professionals. This re¯ ects the adversarial relations between the two groups ± a typical problem in the construction industry of most countries, both developed and developing economies. However, the professionals’ importance index rating of most of the variables was higher than those of the contractors.
Additional constraints identi® ed by the respondents in the open-ended section are shown in Table 2. Corruption includes kickbacks and fraudulent practices, which Okpala and Aniekwu (1988) also identi® ed among the major factors resulting in construction cost overrun in Nigeria. Indigenous contractors were shunned on the pretext that the nation was in a hurry to develop, and only good and well-established contractors, who could complete projects in a short time, were to be considered (Olugbekan, 1991). Such prejudice against Nigerian contractors has deprived them of a right to participate effectively in the country’s construction industry. Double taxation is a problem arising from tax deductions at source on payments by public clients in addition to corporate tax.
There is a reasonable agreement between both groups in the ranking of all the constraints.
Table 1 Constraints on indigenous contractors’ performance
Contractors	Professionals








Uncertainties in supplies and prices of materials
Procuring work
Negotiating variation payment
Meeting contract deadlines
Communicating with client/ representatives
Shortages of skilled labour
Public image
Accounting of ® nancial management
Technical know-how
Commitment to construction
Company organization
Providing quality workmanship
Table 2 Additional constraints on contractors’ performance
Professionals

Changes in government and economy
Theft and fraud by own employees
Breach of contract by public clients
constraints are classi® ed into three categories: dif® culties emanating from the business environment; dif® culties emanating from clients and/or their representatives; and dif® culties due to contractors’ incompetence, as shown in Table 3.
The rank agreement factor and percentage agreement for the categories and all constraints are shown in Table 4. There is a close agreement between both groups in their perceptions of the severity of the constraints emanating from the business environment, and a closer agreement in their perceptions of constraints emanating from clients and clients’ representatives. Both groups substantially disagreed in the way they perceived the severity of constraints arising from personal de® ciencies of the contractors. It is not surprising that the contractors failed to admit personal shortcomings. Studies have shown that small business owner-managers in general, and small contractors in particular, are usually very optimistic of their competence, and often blame external factors for their business problems (Dandridge and Sewall, 1978; Franklin and Goodwin, 1983; Norris, 1984; Mahmood, 1992). The professionals also may have been over-critical of the contractors’ competence.
Table 3 Categories of constraints on contractors’ performance
Constraints emanating from the business environment Procuring work
Shortages of skilled labour
Uncertainties in supplies and prices of materials
Access to plant and equipment
Meeting contract deadlines
Negotiating variation payment
Communication with client
Transporting materials and equipment
Constraints emanating from client or representatives Obtaining interim payment
Constraints resulting from contractors’ de® ciencies Providing quality workmanship
Planning of work and site
Materials control on site
Company organization
Accounting and ® nancial management
Public image
Commitment to construction
Table 4 Comparison of relative importance of all constraints and categories
Source of constraints
All constraints combined
The business environment
Constraints emanating from the business environment were generally perceived as most severe by both groups. Uncertainties in supplies and prices of materials were perceived as the most important constraint by the contractors, while it was perceived as the second most important by the professionals. The major factor creating shortages of materials, and hence intractable ¯ uctuations in prices, is overdependence on imports, either as ® nished products or as raw materials for local production. Both groups agreed that obtaining work regularly is the third most important constraint. Fluctuations in construction workload in
the Nigerian industry are exacerbated by the industry’s overdependence on public contracts. For example, output of the industry fell by 50% in value from 1981 to 1985, and by a further 5% in 1986; the largest single construction project since 1982 has been the building of a new federal capital at Abuja, but progress of work is adversely affected by the reduction in budget allocations and general government cutbacks on all construction projects (Smith, 1991). Indigenized foreign ® rms dominate the large projects, while the proliferation of small indigenous construction enterprises reduces each contractor’s capacity and access to the few jobs that are within their capacity, resulting in little or no jobs for most of them. An analysis of over 1100 construction contracts awarded by federal and state governments between 1974 and 1984 showed that while indigenous contractors obtained 875 contracts ± that is, 77% of the total number of contracts considered ± the total value of the contracts awarded to them was less than 7% of the total volume of works involved (Olateju, 1991). Access to capital was perceived by professionals as the most important constraint, though this variable ranked fourth with contractors. Most indigenous contractors are limited to their own capital resources, and they lack access to adequate ® nance for both working capital and investment in essential equipment. Construction is a high-risk venture; ® nancial institutions tend to be more critical in assessing loan applications from contractors. Lack of collateral, and bad ® nancial management habits of most Nigerian contractors (especially good accounting records) frustrate their applications (Adeyemo, 1974; AkeredoluAle, 1974; Olayide, 1976).
Construction plant and equipment and spares are mostly imported, and very few indigenous contractors could afford equipment ownership. Uncertainties in availability of regular jobs do not even justify such investment. But those who invested in machinery have shown gross ineptitude in equipment maintenance and management (Opara, 1988). Unfortunately, plant and equipment hire and leasing facilities are generally inadequate; the hiring rates are exorbitant, and conditions are unfavourable to indigenous contractors (Olugbekan, 1991).
Delays in payment to contractors for work done was perceived in both groups as the most severe constraint emanating from the client. Public clients were observed as the worst culprit (Aniekwu and Okpala, 1987, 1988). Factors that contribute to delays include lack of adequate funds to meet government ® nancial obligations as a result of inadequate ® nancial planning, unforeseen economic problems, or blatant mismanagement and misappropriation of public and project funds (Anekwe, 1987). Corrupt government of® cials further exacerbate notoriously slow bureaucratic payment procedures, intended to ensure checks and controls for accountability in government expenditures for sel® sh personal gains. Some contractors are also unaware of public administration procedures so as to facilitate payments due to them (Okoronkwo, 1987). De® ciencies in contract conditions, documentation and administration received mixed responses from both groups. Aniekwu and Okpala (1987, 1988), however, highlighted the signi® cant impact of these variables on project cost and time in the industry. These factors were not perceived by the respondents as important constraints on indigenous contractors’ performance.
Lack of skilled labour, as well as de® ciencies in technical and managerial skills, are often highlighted in the literature as the major constraints on indigenous contractors in most developing countries. Similar observations were made about Nigerian contractors (Intermediate Technology, 1970; Diatchavbe, 1974; Schatz, 1977). Neither group perceived shortages of skilled labour as major obstacles to contractors’ performance. Though Aniekwu and Okpala (1987, 1988) highlighted the importance of this variable, a later study (Elinwa and Buba, 1992), however, marginalized its importance as an important factor in project cost and time overrun. Economic recession has caused a lull in construction activity, resulting in considerable under-employment in the industry. The contractors did not perceive de® ciencies in technical know-how, company organization, accounting and ® nancial management or planning of work and site management as major constraints on their performance. Though these variables were among the 12 most severe constraints identi® ed by the professionals, none was rated as very important (5 or 6 on the scale) by the majority of the professionals. The majority of the contractors sampled were trained construction professionals. Olateju (1991) similarly observed the entry of a new cadre of trained professionals in the industry. The performance of this new crop of construction entrepreneurs has probably improved the images of technical and managerial incompetence that were associated with Nigerian contractors in the past.
The responses of contractors and professionals on the relevance of the contractor development measures to the situation of Nigerian contractors are shown in Table 5. All variables have an importance index greater than 50. Thus they were all perceived as important contractor development measures by both groups. However, the professionals’ rating of most of the programme was generally higher than those of the contractors. Notwithstanding, programmes perceived as very important by both groups are also those required to ameliorate the most important constraints identi® ed: obtaining interim payments; uncertainties in supplies and prices of materials; and inadequate access to capital, plant and equipment.
Analysis showed a very close agreement between the two groups on the appropriate contractor-development programmes to ameliorate the constraints faced by indigenous contractors in the Nigerian industry. The rank agreement factor is 5.0 (maximum rank agreement = 20), and percentage agreement is 75%.
Table 5 Contractor-development measures for indigenous contractors in Nigeria
Contractors	Professionals
Variables	5 	3 	1 	Import- Rank 	5 	3	1	Import- Rank








Planned government demand for construction
Improved access to materials
Provision of loan/loan guarantee schemes
Provision of plant hire
Provision of mobilization allowances
Training and advisory services
Improved tendering procedures
More subcontracting by larger ® rms
Lower retention money
Incentives for small ® rms to team up
Contract splitting
More active contractors’ association
Government sponsored contractor development agency
groups emphasized provision of support to improve the business environment in which contractors operate.
Table 6 presents the utility values, weights and need index of the support items. Self-assessment is often emphasized in needs analysis, as ownership of needs increases commitment towards proposed remedies (Oppenheimer, 1982; McEnery and McEnery, 1987). Hence a greater weight is assigned to contractors’ attributes. The weight of 100 is assigned to contractors’ self-rating of needs, while 60 is assigned to that of the professionals. The ratio of 100: 60 yields standardized weights of 0.625 and 0.375 respectively.
The MAUA presents a slightly different rank order of needs from that obtained from either of the groups, but it closely resembles that of the contractors. The most important measures in descending order of importance are: a more ef® cient payment system, to ensure prompt payments for work done; planned government demand for construction works to facilitate a regular ¯ ow of work; improved access to materials, to overcome uncertainties in supplies and ¯ uctuations in prices of materials; and provision of loans or loan guarantee schemes to improve access to capital. Other measures with a high need index include: provision of plant hire services, to ameliorate dif® culties in equipment ownership; provision of mobilization allowances, to minimize working capital requirements; and provision of training to enhance technical and managerial capacity.
Indigenous contractors’ participation in the Nigerian industry is quite marginal (Olateju, 1991; and Olugbekan, 1991). Programmes such as improved tendering procedures, standardization of contract documents, subcontracting by larger ® rms, and incentives to form larger ® rms will enhance indigenous contractors’ access to work, and these were perceived as very important by the majority of contractors. However, only the last two were perceived as very important by the majority of the professionals. But the majority of the respondents in both groups agreed that less use of direct labour, contract splitting, and special preference for indigenous contractors in contract price
Table 6 MAUA of contractor development measures
Contractors
Professionals
Improved access to materials	87.7
for construction	87.9
Provision of plant hire
Provision of loan/loan guarantee
Training and advisory services
Improved tendering procedures
More subcontracting by big ® rms
Incentives for ® rms to merge
Price preference/tendering bias
Contract splitting
Standardization of design
Lower retention money
More active contractors’ association
Government sponsored contractor development agency
or in tendering exclusively for some contracts are modestly important in improving indigenous contractors’ participation in construction works. The majority of the respondents in both groups did not perceive an institution such as a contractor development agency or a contractors’ association to coordinate and promote contractor development and channel government support to contractors to be a desirable support programme in the Nigerian context.
It is, however, interesting that a majority of the contractors perceived provision of training and advisory services (73%) and more ef® cient contractorregistration procedures (65%) as very important. These variables have been identi® ed as the catalyst required for meaningful development of Nigerian contractors (Adams, 1987, 1988) as lapses in these areas have encouraged incompetence and the proliferation of `emergency contractors’, who are not usually committed to construction entrepreneurship. They operate sporadically in the industry whenever circumstances are favourable to facilitate easy access to construction contracts.
There is a consensus among the contractors and the professionals on the major constraints on performance of indigenous contractors and the most appropriate programmes needed to promote development of Nigerian contractors. Both groups agreed that the most severe constraints emanate from the business environment and the client. These are typical problems of small contractors in most developing countries: uncertainties in supplies and prices of materials, obtaining interim payments, obtaining regular jobs, access to ® nance for working capital, and investment in plant and equipment. The professionals indicated that other important constraints emanate from the managerial de® ciencies of contractors, while the contractors highlighted the modest impact made by shortcomings in the professionals’ activities in the construction process.
Both groups, however, agreed that the most important support required is that to mitigate the critical constraints: primarily, improved access to regular work, as well as provision of basic resources ± money, materials and machinery required to implement jobs obtained. There was a consensus that intractable delays in payment for work done are most detrimental, and the situation demands urgent attention to ease the dif® culties caused. The impact of this critical problem will be considerably minimized if mobilization advance is paid by public clients: with necessary measures to curtail any abuse, however. The study shows that the provision of training, and a more ef® cient contractor registration procedure, which have hitherto been neglected, were perceived as very important by the majority of respondents in both samples. Training was ranked next in importance to the primary support required to ensure access to basic inputs and regular work.
The importance of the correct diagnosis of the needs of a target group cannot be overemphasized. The ® ndings of this study validate many other studies, which showed that small business owner-managers are reluctant to admit their own de® ciencies. The ® ndings further substantiate the need for assessment by others to verify self-assessment of problems and needs by contractors. This approach was suggested by Hernes (1988) in respect of training need analysis; it could also be adopted for assessing contractor-development needs. It would ensure a more objective assessment of contractors’ performance, problems and needs, so that proposed intervention programmes are adequate and appropriate to the problems identi® ed. This will also promote the target population’s acceptance of and commitment towards programmes, and hence the effective take-up and utility of programmes to ensure the success of the development process.
As past efforts to create a more favourable operating environment for indigenous contractors have not been successful, future development programmes for Nigerian contractors should emphasize the provision of appropriate training programmes, to enable them learn how to deal effectively with the emerging constraints in their business environment. The study also shows conclusively that there is a general dislike in the Nigerian industry for an institution or agency for contractor development, such as is the case in many developing countries. This was appropriately left out in the National Construction Policy. Though inef® cient contract conditions, documentation or tendering processes were not perceived as major constraints to contractors’ performance, the need for urgent review in the existing systems and practices should be emphasized.
The ® ndings of the study also show that a new crop of contractors is emerging in Nigeria. They are not `emergency contractors’, as they have relevant professional education and training in construction. They have the potentials to become larger and more ef® cient construction ® rms if appropriate supports are provided. They would probably be more committed to utilizing supports provided effectively to improve their ® rms’ performance in the industry. It is recommended that more emphasis should be placed on promoting management development of this category of contractors, using appropriate education and training approaches. The National Construction Policy paid little attention to this aspect. Further research will be required in this area.
My gratitude is to the Association of Commonwealth Universities and the British Council for sponsoring the study, and the University of Lagos, in particular my former colleagues at the Department of Building and Faculty of Environmental Science, for their support. The support of many friends, relatives and colleagues who helped to administer the questionnaires in Nigeria, as well as the contractors who responded, is also acknowledged and appreciated. My sincere appreciation goes also to Professor John Andrews of University College London for his guidance through the study. I am grateful to Dr John Ebohon and Ms Janet Wood of De Montfort University and Dr Paul Olomolaiye of the University of Wolverhampton for their comments on an earlier draft of the paper. They are absolved of any mistakes or errors, which are entirely mine.
