Construction Management and Economics (1995) 13, 235—241
Total systems intervention: an integrated approach to time, cost and quality management
P.D. RWELAMILA and K.A. HALL*
Department of Construction Economics and Management, University of Cape Town, Private Bag, Rondebosch, 7700, South Africa
Received 18 August 1994; revised 27 January 1995
Historically there has been an attempt within the construction industry to manage projects by attempting to find the most efficient way of managing time and cost with little recognition of the importance of the aspect of quality. This paper proposes that traditional scientific methods have been utilized in order to determine the optimum method of managing time, cost and quality. These mechanistic models have promoted concepts that lack the aspects of viability and culture associated with the human dimension of the management function. This has resulted in a heuristic, trial-and-error approach to the management of projects and the suggestion, both directly and indirectly by participants to the construction industry, that the construction industry is characterized by the 'endemic crisis'. The paper concludes that the balance between these three factors in conjunction with a consideration of the social/behaviourial aspects, and therefore the endorsement of a total time, quality, cost management system can be achieved via the utilization ofan approach to 'problem-solving', namely, total systems intervention.
Time, quality, cost, management theory, total systems intervention, culture.
Introduction
The most important issues for the clients of the construction industry are quality, cost and time and yet the vast majority of construction projects are procured based on only two of these major parameters, namely, cost and time (Bennett and Grice, 1990). Hughes and Williams (1991) suggest that this is understandable since most project management control systems highlight time and cost, and leave the responsibility of quality to others. According to Herbsman and Ellis (1991) the major disappointments in this traditional approach have been in extensive delays in the planned schedules, cost overruns, serious problems in quality, and a general increase in the number ofclaims and litigation associated with the construction industry. Herbsman and Ellis (1991) further argue that the common opinion is that under this approach the client does not get the best product for his/her money, Lansley (1993) supports this, but argues strongly for the importance of studying the behavioural aspects of management in attempting to
* To whom correspondence should be addressed.
0144-6193 0 1995 E. & F.N. spon
address the problems of the industry i.e. that it is the issue of the 'human factor' involved in construction projects that needs to be addressed.
Furthermore, Bower (1989), Ellis and Herbsman (1990) and Harp (1990) to name a few, state that in order to plan and manage a successful project, three major parameters should be considered, namely, cost, time, and quality. Hughes and Williams (1991) in arguing for the consideration of these three parameters/ factors, suggest that they must be in balance i.e. in effect are a three-sided triangle of time, cost and quality. Subsequently, any neglect of one factor will have a corresponding detrimental effect upon the other two. As stated by Hughes and Williams (1991);
'This follows the mathematical rule that an alteration to any angle in a triangle will amend one or both of the other angles.'
It is the author's contention that time, cost, quality management, although having been acknowledged and purported to be practised in the construction industry for a considerable length of time, little evidence exists of successful projects where these three factors have been balanced. Research on project performance (e.g. Ireland (1983), NEDO (1983), Sidwell (1982), and Morris and Hough (1986)) has relied heavily on empirical and quantitative research methodologies. This has led to contradictory findings with very little to support Hughes and Williams (1991) project time, cost, quality 'triangle' balance. The authors are convinced that since these factors are to be embraced and balanced by the entire project team i.e. a human activity system, an appropriate research method is essential in order to solve the problems confronting various project procurement systems and the need to balance these three factors. Hence, an ethnographic research methodology that demands an equal consideration of both technical and humanistic aspects of project organization is imperative. This paper proposes that a balance between these three factors (time, quality and cost) in conjunction with a consideration of the sociological/behavioural aspects can be achieved by adopting a 'critical system' ideology and the utilization of an approach called Total Systems Intervention (TSI). In order to achieve this an overview of a total time, quality, cost management system will be discussed, focusing on these three factors individually. Secondly, an overview of critical systems thinking and the TSI approach will be presented. Thirdly, the incorporation of TSI into construction projects will be examined. Finally, conclusions will be drawn as to the appropriateness of TSI in addressing the inherent sociological aspects of the time, cost and quality management system.
A total time, quality and cost management system — an overview
The concept ofmanaging construction projects based on time and cost is deeply rooted in the traditional procurement system where competitive bidding forms the backbone of the traditional project management control system. Although authors like Bromilow (1974), Sidwell (1982), Ireland (1983) and Morris and Hough (1986) admit the fact that time, cost and quality are the principal feasible objectives of the client, in practice only two factors (cost and time) are emphasized and quality is left to the uninformed who try to follow their natural instincts because they claim to 'know what quality is when they see it'. This intuitive approach has led to serious attitudinal, behaviourial and sociological problems, which do no more than reflect the understanding and knowledge of balancing time, quality and cost that are present in any project organization. Subsequently, these approaches lack any understanding of the intrinsic ontological, epistemological and methodological assumptions that all participants to the project management system may have.
Tracing this approach and in addressing these issues, Herbsman and Ellis (1991) suggest that an overview of competitive bidding in the United States of America (USA) may be appropriate. Citing the work of Harp (1988), they argue that competitive bidding has been in practice in New York since 1847. The basic idea behind the concept of competitive bidding, is that the lower bidding system (cost consideration) protected the public from extravagance, corruption, and other improper practice by public officials. According to Netherton (1959) and Cohen (1961) the original function of the competitive bidding requirement was to ensure that the public received the full benefit of the USA's free enterprise system by providing public construction at the lowest price offered by competitive bidding. This function appears to hold water in all countries where competitive bidding is practised. In English commonwealth countries the duration of the project i.e. time factor, is normally considered in tender reporting. The objectivity of this bidding system, either based on price, or both price and project duration, is assured because price alone, or, both project duration and price determine the criteria for evaluating bids. For many participants in the construction industry, this reason alone makes it worth the disadvantages related to this practice (Herbsman and Ellis, 1991). The major disadvantage in utilizing this foundation is that the contractor selection process is based only on one or two elements — cost/cost and time, where no cognisance is taken of quality. According to Herbsman and Ellis (1991 ) and Rwelamila ( 1992), many problems have occurred during the course of using this system, namely, unreasonably low bids, bid rigging, unqualified contractors etc. In the course of finding solutions several research projects have been carried out. For example the Tavistock Institute (1966) described the United Kingdom construction industry as being characterized by what it termed as the 'endemic crisis'. This crisis could be described as global (authors emphasis). The report suggested that managers need alternative models which will simplify the situation but retain a high degree of reality. Alternative models have been suggested by a number of authors, for example, Bower (1989), Byrd (1989), Marek (1989) and Harp (1990). Nevertheless, these alternatives still lack any consideration of the underlying sociological issues inherent in the management of 'quality'.
Although it is claimed that time, cost and quality are incorporated quite adequately in the management of projects, research has clearly shown that the time, cost, quality management system has failed in balancing these three factors, and in effect has resulted in a time-cost bias. Each of these factors will be discussed separately, highlighting those criticisms that have been levelled at the time, cost, quality management system.
Timely completion of a project is frequently seen as a major criterion of project success. According to the NEDO report for Faster Building for Industry (1983), a project success was a function of management effort necessary to complete on time and this disciplined approach helped to control costs and quality. Newcombe et al. (1990) argue that despite this shibboleth, there has been almost universal criticism of failures ofthe construction industry to deliver projects in a timely way. In Australia, Bromilow (1974) found that building contracts overran on average a staggering 47% over the original budget time. Other research projects addressing this problem include Wood (1975) and Mobbs (1976). Furthermore that this management effort requires a recognition of the interdependence of time, quality and cost and this will ultimately help to control costs and quality.

From the clients's point of view, quality could be defined as 'value for money'. The goal is client satisfaction, and the implementation of a quality management system is a key tool in consistently and reliably managing that goal. According to Rounds (1985), large expenditures oftime, money and resources, both human and material, are wasted each year because of inefficient or nonexistent quality management procedures. For successful project quality management three separate but interdependent components must be integrated, namely:
Strategy and structure — addresses the 'what' and the 'how' the project functions,
The technical component — addresses the project organization skills, practices, tools, and methods used throughout the project organization for product and process development, and,
Culture — includes the norms and behaviourial expectations the project organization has set for itself, and for those people involved in that organization.
When these three total quality management components are successfully integrated, the project will begin to realize significant, measurable, and observable improvements. The first and second components listed above have, for a long time, dominated quality management initiatives without significant positive results. The system embracing two components to the detriment of the third component could be described as 'quality management without a link pin'. TQM initiatives to date have failed to recognize those issues concerned with complimentarism, sociological awareness and the promotion of human well-being and emancipation.
Clients commissioning projects have been increasingly cost-conscious, being concerned with profitability (industrialists), accountability (government bodies), or joint stock firms that are concerned with both. Projects themselves have become technologically complex, and the economic and social order has turned into something sophisticated and dynamic. In order to deal with the needs of this new situation cost, as one of the three project parameters, it is becoming the responsibility of all project stakeholders, where a stakeholder may be defined as any person that affects, or is affected by the project management system (Flood and Jackson, 1991 a).
Besides project delays, cost overruns are frequently identified as one of the principal factors leading to the high cost of construction (Zaki and James, 1987; Okpala and Aniekwu, 1988; Charles and Andrew, 1990). Furthermore, in looking at factors which impact on the project cost over-run rate, Elinawa and Buba (1993) cite the 'nature of interpersonal relations on the project as one of the three primary factors' affecting cost.
The authors are convinced that the only way of addressing these shortfalls in the time, cost and quality management system is to accept that time and cost are important factors in any construction project, and that the aspect of quality needs to address the sociological issues that are an intrinsic part of any human activity system. It is proposed that critical systems thinking and the utilization of a total systems intervention (TSI) approach will provide the foundation for confronting these inadequacies. An overview of critical systems thinking and TSI will be presented hereunder, followed by a discussion of the application of TSI to construction projects.
Critical systems thinking and the total systems intervention approach
Critical systems thinking
In balancing these three factors (time, quality, cost), traditionally, two types of models have been utilized in order to gain information, knowledge and understanding about them (Gharajedaghi, 1985). These models historically may be seen as either mechanistic or organismic in nature. The mechanistic models have attempted to view the world and the social reality therein as a machine. This has resulted in bureaucratic structures within the management of time, quality and cost, that is neither capable of learning, nor adapting to the environment within which it is functioning, and does not allow for the consideration of the sociological issues involved (Morgan, 1986). By comparison, organismic models have striven for growth within the system and subsequently have placed greater emphasis on the issues of efficiency and effectiveness within the realms of management. Gharajedaghi (1985), citing Buckley (1967) argues that although these have been an improvement on the mechanistic models, they fail to recognize the intrinsic differences between a social system and an organism.
In an industry characterized by accelerating change, increasing uncertainty and growing complexity it is becoming apparent that these traditional models are inadequate as guides to decision-making since they leave crucial human-related management issues unanswered (Gharajedaghi, 1985; Rwelamila, 1992). Van Donk and Sanders (1993) argue that the concept of organizational culture and the measurement thereof yields valuable information for the improvement of quality management. It is further argued by Flood (1993) that total time, quality and cost management can be improved via an effective approach to management that assumes the organizational structure is that of a sociocultural system i.e. the aspect of culture is included within the management scenario.
The sociocultural perception of the organization is underpinned by the philosophical ideology of critical systems thinking. Critical systems thinking has developed as a direct result of the criticisms levelled at the earlier systems approaches. Schecter (1991) sees the philosophical ideology of critical systems thinking as being defined by three commitments, namely; to critique, to emancipation, and, to pluralism. The commitment to critique demands a constant questioning of the practice and theory of all schools of thought in a discipline, while that of emancipation requires recognition of human beings within the organization and their potential for full development via free and equal participation in community with others. Furthermore, that the commitment to emancipation would include the recognition of barriers to human emancipation e.g. unequal power relations, and the use of group theories to address this commitment (Schecter, 1991). Rwelamila (1994) argues that group dynamics within the overall projectmanagement system has a significant impact on the overall effectiveness and efficiency of a project. Subsequently, the overall effectiveness and efficiency of the project is dependent upon the co-ordinated efforts of individuals working together in groups within the whole project management system. Finally, the commitment to pluralism requires a realization that all systems approaches have a contribution to make, and that no single approach is adequate enough to address the full range of problematic situations facing a manager in the current sociocultural environment of the world today.
This innovative way of thinking, according to Flood and Jackson (199 la) demands a change in your perceptions of the world as a whole, and hence the construction project, and does provide the philosophical underpinning for a new approach to planning, designing, 'problem-solving' and the evaluation of a project organization's concerns. The approach is that of 'total systems intervention'. An overview of TSI will be presented hereunder.
Total systems intervention (TSI)
Flood and Jackson (1991a; 1991b) developed the concept of TSI and perceive it to comprise three phases, namely: creativity, choice, and implementation. The creativity phase requires the project manager to use systems metaphors that assist him/her in focusing attention on the different aspects of the project organization's functioning from which the choice of an appropriate systems-based intervention methodology can be made. The choice phase requires that an appropriate systemsbased intervention methodology that suits the characteristics of the project organization's situation (established during the creativity phase), be chosen. Flood and Jackson (199 la) propose the use of a two-dimensional framework that will aide in the choice of a systems methodology. The first dimension refers to the complexity of the system that constitutes the problem situation i.e. simple and complex systems. The second dimension pertains to the relationship between the individuals or parties who stand to gain/lose from a systems involvement i.e. unitary, pluralist or coercive. The result of the choice phase is that a 'dominant' systems-based methodology will be chosen. Lastly, the implementation phase requires the physical use of the chosen systems methodology in order to generate specific proposals for change within those aspects of the project and/or project organization currently vital for its effective and efficient functioning.
In terms of the development of a new perception of the balancing of time, cost and quality, TSI may be seen to be an appropriate approach for addressing the inadequacies of the current time, cost, quality management system, highlighted in the first two sections. A discussion of the application of the TSI approach to the construction process will be presented hereunder.
Application of TSI to the construction industry
All major elements of a construction project must embrace these parameters (time, quality and cost) throughout all its stages, namely: during inception, feasibility, outline proposals, scheme design, detail design, construction, commissioning and occupation. Using the construction phase of the project as an example, quality, cost and time must be the concern of every person involved in the project. In order to balance these three project parameters through an appropriate systems methodology, the implementation of the time, quality, cost management system (TQC) should facilitate the attainment of both internal client (the contractor team and project consultants) and external client (commonly referred to as client or owner) satisfaction with the construction service provided. The external client must obtain a final product that reflects his/her brief, and the internal client must feel 'healthy and safe' when dealing with any aspect of the project. The project programme, drawings and specifications must be adhered to in order to meet the external client's requirements in terms of quality, cost and time. Besides financial and other rewards, the project internal client must feel that his/her safety is not compromised by the necessity ofmeeting the external client's requirements stipulated in his/her brief.
The crucial concern for meeting the project brief must be on improving client service — both internally and externally. For example, the advice from the project engineering services consultant, should be treated as a service to be considered (in terms of TQC) in the same way that the main contractor should deal with (as traditionally viewed) project materials suppliers. Two action areas must hold the key to the effective implementation of TQC, these are communication and control. The ethos in which communication and control are established must incorporate participation. Everyone involved in the project must feel that they have a stake in the TQC function.
In order to successfully manage a project through the TSI approach, it is vital for the project manager and other project consultants (P&PCs) to accept and adopt the three primary philosophical stands of TSI, namely: complementarism, sociological awareness and emancipation.
Complementarism: The P&PCs dealing with a project at any stage should not only concern themselves with certain procurement systems under 'some' approaches which 'have worked' on various projects and hence are accepted in practice. They must recognize that in order to meet the client's brief, and establish appropriate grounds to deal with future (probably more complicated) projects, effective understanding of project dynamics can only occur if practice (successful or otherwise), can be related back to a set of theoretical presuppositions which are being consciously tested through that practice. Different procurement systems (basic and modified ones) express different rationalities that stem from alternative theoretical positions which they each reflect. Complementarism must give guidance so that each procurement system is put to work only on the kind of project issues or problems for which it is the most suited.
Sociological awareness: The P&PCs must recognize that there are internal and external project pressures which have led to certain project procurement systems being popular for guiding various intervention at particular times. For example, we could point to a dominant or institutionalized procurement system within English speaking commonwealth countries, such as the traditional procurement system (the basic version). This procurement system indirectly dictates which project parameters are most important, namely: cost and time. This is an example, which suggests why it is important for the P&PCs to enquire into the popularity or otherwise of certain procurement systems (basic and modified) in given circumstances, and to focus on appropriateness, and consequently 'liberate' those procurement systems. For example, the choice of a traditional procurement system with rigid understanding of its impact on the three parameters of a project implies that two parameters (cost and time) are being privileged at the expense of quality, hence poor project performance.
Emancipatory: Throughout the course of a project, project achievements should be for all individuals, working through the project, outside the project and the maximum development of their potential. The project manager and other consultants should aim at making sure that Habermas' (1972) two fundamental conditions underpinning the sociocultural form of life in the human species are met. These are 'work' and 'interaction'. The P&PCs must acknowledge one of the basic motivators of project personnel that the project work should enable the workers to achieve their goals and to bring about material well-being through social labour. The importance of project work should lead the workers to have a 'technical interest' at different levels of work in the prediction and control ofnatural and social affairs. 'Interaction' according to Habermas (1972) is labelled the 'practical interest'. Using the interaction vehicle, the P&PCs should aim at securing and expanding the possibilities for mutual understanding among all project workers across task groups (contractors and consultants personnel).
These last two sections have sought to demonstrate the way that the logic and process of TSI can be used to support and enrich project thinking and planning, towards balancing quality, time and cost. The necessity of using the TSI approach is based on the recognition of existing project organizational and societal pressures on the overall performance of the project as argued in earlier sections. It is through the TSI approach where an appropriate organizational system could be adapted, and hence an effective mechanism of balancing the three primary parameters of a construction project achieved.

The existing construction project management systems have created many problems in past years. Many modifications have been effected to original concepts but these systems have remained basically unchanged. The successful bidder under these systems is chosen by the lowest, responsible cost and sometimes time is included as a secondary factor to cost. Quality has been ignored and not taken into consideration. There is evidence to suggest that current construction project management systems have caused many failures in the form of delays, low quality and numerous other claims on the project.
In attempting to balance these three project parameters in the past, the two traditional models (organizmic and mechanistic) which have been utilized in order to gain information, knowledge and understanding about these parameters need to be revisited. These models cannot accommodate project(s) dynamics which are a reflection of the character of the construction industry. Total time, quality and cost management needs to face the realities of accelerating changes, increasing uncertainty and growing complexities facing the construction industry. In order to face these realities, the paper introduced an effective management focus that assumes the organizational structure to be a sociocultural system, where the 'human' aspect of culture is included within the management scenario.
In order to facilitate the effective functioning of this sociocultural system, the authors have proposed an approach which demands a change in project consultants' perceptions of the world as a whole, the project and therefore may be perceived as undergoing a 'paradigm shift'. Total system intervention is proposed as an appropriate approach to project planning, designing, 'problem solving' and the evaluation of a project organization's concerns across all procurement systems.
