See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at:
The business environment of the construction industry in Nigeria
Article  in  Construction Management and Economics · November 1995
CITATIONS	READS

33 PUBLICATIONS   579 CITATIONS
All content following this page was uploaded by Nathaniel Aniekwu on 03 October 2014.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
THE BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT OF THE CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY IN  NIGERIA
Department of Civil Engineering, University of Benin.
The business environment of any industry consists of systems and structures, which determine the atmosphere under which all the businesses of that industry is transacted. They affect directly or indirectly all practitioners of that industry, without there being able to influence it. In a scientific investigation into the problems of the construction industry in Nigeria, out of the 47 variables identified, that can adversely affect the construction industry, 37 variables were classified under the Business environment of the construction industry. Of the 18 variables considered to constitute the most serious problems, which occur all the time, 17 variables were related to the Business environment of the construction industry.
This papers reviews the research findings with respect to the Business environment of the construction industry in Nigeria and discusses the implications of some of the findings.
Construction Industry, Business Environment, Variables. Severity Index.
The construction industry consists of structures and systems of activities which interact under the catalysm of construction operators to attain desired construction goals. A feature of the construction industry is the division of the production responsibilities amongst many participants who belong to different organizations with different polices, objectives and practices. Also most construction industry clientele come from the public sector, whose volume and composition vary thus involving high market variations and risks. There are also difficulties in securing investment capital, retaining skilled and permanent workers, investing in basic equipment and mobilizing on new jobs. Moreover, most construction products are custom made to meet the particular needs of clients, they are also location specific thereby necessitating the movement of manpower and materials to each site (Kirmani S, 1988). The whole process is fraught with so many unknowns  which are further complicated by special factors in a developing country like Nigeria.
The problem of the construction industry are multi-faceted and various scholarly works have been done on the problems of the construction industry in Nigeria. Wahab (1977) has identified various constraints responsible for the low productivity of the Nigerian contractor. Edmonds and Miles (1983) identified another set of problems which they attributed to the fact that the contractual framework and procedures under which the domestic contractor work in developing countries are not suitably adapted to their local conditions. Okpala and Aniekwu (1988) identified  delays and cost over-runs as the principal factors responsible for the high cost of construction in the Nigerian construction industry  and derived a mathematical model for assessing the importance of different variables in affecting the industry. Aniekwu and Okpala (1987) through a survey involving consultants to the construction industry, identified a set of factors termed systemic factors, which also adversely affect the construction industry in Nigeria and arise from the application of systems not suitable to the local environment. Aniekwu and Okpala (1988) also identified another set of factors termed structural factors that are inherently related to the conditions and practices in Nigeria, which adversely affect construction activities. These are unique to the Nigerian environment and cannot necessarily be controlled by provisions in the conditions of contract in use. A Survey carried out by the Ministry of National Planning in Nigeria, (Olugbekan, 1991) established the fact that, indigenous companies on the average have lower total paid-up share capital base, compared with the Foreign companies. An analysis of Federal Road Projects in Nigeria covering the period between 1979 and 1991, carried out with respect to construction, rehabilitation, overlay, mechanical services and electrical services contract, indicated that the low capital base of the Indigenous Contractor among other factors excluded them from handling big Projects and put a few expatriate contractors in a monopoly position, thus reducing the worth of competitive bidding (Olugbekan, 1991). The Federal Government of Nigeria in June 1991, articulated some of the issues raised in some of the cited works, in a "National Construction Policy (Federal Government of Nigeria, 1991) and also established an organ, the "Raw Materials Research and development Council", to initiate, organize and disseminate information on research works on local raw materials.
From an exploratory survey, which involved a review of available literature, interviews with professionals of the construction industry, and information culled from a World Bank draft questionnaire titled, "development of the construction industry in Nigeria" (The World Bank, Field Office, Lagos 1988), 47 variables that adversely affect the construction industry in Nigeria were identified. 15 of these variables were identified as being related to contracting and contract administration practices; 34 variables were identified as being related to the business environment of the construction industry; 5 variables were identified as being related to the capacity and efficiency of the construction industry, 5 were identified as relating to capable institutions to cater for the progress of the construction industry. The principal manifestations of these adverse effects in the Nigerian construction industry are high costs of construction resulting from delays and cost over-runs of construction costs and low value addedness in the construction industry, resulting from the heavy dependence of the construction industry on imported materials and technology. These problems emanate from numerous factors which can be broadly classified under the following headings:
(a) Contracting and contract administration practices.
(b) Business environment of the construction industry.
(c) Capacity and efficiency of the contractors.
(d) Capable institutions to cater for the progress of the industry.
CONTRACT AND CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION PRACTICES:
This classification is related to factors that adversely affect the industry, caused by inefficient contracting and contract administration practices. Some of these factors include, pre-qualification procedures; tendering or bidding procedures; preparation of the bids; evaluation and award procedures; the condition of construction contract; level of compliance with the conditions; organization of the work force; management of plant and materials; scheduling and delivery periods, etc.
BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT OF THE CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY:
The business environment of any industry constitute the atmosphere in which all the industry transactions are carried out. They consist of tangible and intangible systems and structures, which affect and regulate the relations, actions and interaction of all the participants of that industry. These systems and structures include systems of governmental policies, procedures and administrative structures of incumbent government relating to procurement and disbursement procedures; approvals, licensing and negotiation policies; bonding, insurance and taxation policies; banking, and credit policies; imports and foreign exchange transactions; legal systems of redress and adjudication; availability of manpower, materials and plants; corrupt practices, customs and general political climate.
CAPACITY AND EFFICIENCY OF THE CONTRACTOR:
This classification reviews factors relating to the efficient performance of the contractor and include such factors as the general and unique characteristics of the contractor; categories and sizes of the contractor's operations; the size and scope of the industry; motivation and productivity rates; communication and control methods; levels and range of available manpower; avenues for manpower development, etc.
CAPABLE INSTITUTIONS TO CATER TO THE PROGRESS OF THE INDUSTRY:
This classification reviews the objectives, roles and effectiveness of professional associations, both governmental and private, instituted to cater for the progress of the construction industry. The review relates to their role in protecting the interest of the professions/contractors at all levels of government; encouragement of relevant education and research; regulation of standards and professional ethics; input in the formulation of policies relating to the industry; development of public awareness and confidence in the industry, etc.
This classification deals with all factors relating to research and development with respect to the construction industry. These factors include the financing of research and development activities by government, companies or individuals in the area of materials and methods; research and development into the use of local materials; dissemination of information on research findings; response to successes in local material researches; establishment of materials and design standards and codes of practices, etc.
CLASSIFICATIONS:
Of the identified variable, 15 of the identified variables were classified as being related to contracting and contract administration practices, 34 variables were identified as being related to the business environment of the construction industry; 5 variables were identified as being related to the capacity and efficiency of the construction industry, 5 were identified as relating to capable institutions to cater for the progress of the construction industry. No variables were found to be directly related to the influences of Research and development (Appendix 1). Some of the variables appear under more than one classification, because they are relevant in the various classifications under which they are listed.
A questionnaire on a 5-point scale incorporating all the identified variables and other questions to identify the specific characteristics of the Nigerian construction industry was designed and sent out to Building and Civil Engineering contractors in only 11 States, out of the 21 States that make up Nigeria, (Delta, Abia, Osun, Kogi, Edo, Lagos, Rivers, Imo, Ogun, Oyo and Kwara States), due to limitations in funds. These States however, all fall within the southern states of Nigeria and are similar in terms of climatic and business environmental conditions. The questionnaire required respondents to mark the order of importance they attached to each variable in affecting the problems of the Nigerian construction industry. The variables were randomly scattered within the questionnaire to avoid any identifiable pattern which may affect the response. A total of 463 questionnaires were distributed out of which 344 responses were received, representing an average response rate of 74%.
The apparently high response rate was due mainly to the person to person approach used in the distribution and collection of the questionnaires. This approach provided the contractors with the opportunity to personally interact with our field workers (all field workers were graduates of civil engineering, with 2-weeks special preparatory training for the exercise), who were quite knowledgeable in their activities and who the contractors felt might be in the position to help.
The analytical procedures employed was aimed at establishing the relative importance of the various attributes contributing to the problems of the Nigerian construction industry. In the analysis weights were assigned to different degrees of seriousness or importance attached to the variables. The sum total of points obtained based on the responses on that variable is used to determine its severity index which is defined below.
Severity Index (S.I)
Rt where Rw = No of respondents
W = weight  or point assigned
Rt = Total number of response obtained for that variable.
In other to measure the level of agreement in ranking between groups of respondents, a rank agreement factor as defined by Okpala and Aniekwu (1988), and given in equation (2), was used for any two groups. This represents the average absolute difference in rank of the item.The percentage disagreement Pd is ;
where N = number of items.  	 i = 1,2,3,.........N.  	 j = N - i + 1.
while percentage agreement Pa is
The full derivation of these equations are detailed in Okpala and Aniekwu (1988). A D-base III computer software was used to execute the detailed analysis of the responses based on different grouping of respondents, and the general result is given in (Table 1). The analysis of the responses were based on the following categories;
a. the size of the company (small, medium or large),
b. the main area of the company's operations (civil or building),
c. the nature of the company (indigenous or foreign),   d: location of the company (State of respondent),
e. contractors whose principal client is government,
f. percentage of loan furnished as collateral,
g. percentage of profit spent on research,
h. percentage of skilled workers with vocational training,
i. percentage of workers that received on-the-job training.
However, due to the limitations imposed by the nature of a journal publication, all the analysis results cannot be presented, but are fully documented in Aniekwu and Okpala (1989).
In the interpretation of the degree of importance as perceived by the respondents, a scale based on mathematical reasoning was used for the severity indices values as given below:
S.I < 1.4, implies not serious, or not difficult or never felt its effects.
S.I = 1.5 - 2.4, implies moderately serous or moderately difficult or felt its effects few of the time.
S.I = 2,5 - 3.4, implies usually serious, usually difficult or felt its effect many times.
S.I = 3.5 - 4.4. implies very serious, very difficult or felt its effect most of the time.
S.I > 4.5, implies extremely serious, extremely difficult or felt its effect always.
Table 1.0  : Ranking and Severity Indices for the General Sample
Difficulty in obtaining foreign exchange allocation for equipment purchase

Difficulty in importing spare parts  directly including Customs

Difficulty in obtaining foreign exchange allocation for spare parts
Problems of incompetent and  unqualified contractors winning contract awards
Difficulties arising from changing    government
Difficulties in securing credit on  reasonable terms from commercial banks for interim construction financing.
Problems of inadequate procedures  for the registration of contractors, causing unqualified people to be registered as construction contractors.
Problems of delays in receiving   payments for completed works.
Problems of gratifying government  officials in order to get paid for completed jobs.
Problems of awarding most of the government contracts to foreign firms.
Delay in the delivery of imported  materials and equipment.
Difficulty in finding equipment dealers with adequate maintenance services.
Shortage of materials.
Difficulty in dealing with the Federal Government concerning construction issues e.g. approval procedures.
Client’s unwillingness to pay  advances  for mobilization and purchase of equipment.
Owner’s unwillingness to compensate  fully for price escalations suffered for reasons beyond your control.
Frequent unfair bidding procedures  and contract awards.
Difficult in finding equipment  maintenance services other than those available through dealers
Difficulties in dealing with the state governments, concerning construction issues.
Difficulties arising from changing government officials
Problems of delay by the owner or his agents to take decisions at the appropriate time.
Shortage of testing facilities for local materials.
Problems associated with lack of standardization of the local materials
Inflating the contract sum

Problems of too many changes in the  original design.
Problems of unrealistic completion schedule being imposed by the design consultants.
the choice of sub-contractors/suppliers.
Problems created by your inability to challenge some of the resident engineer's instructions
Difficulty in dealing with local government concerning construction company.
Non-performance of sub-contractors and nominated suppliers.
Difficulty in dealing with other government parastatals/ agencies concerning construction issues.
Problems associated with delays and unfair settlement of disputes between owners and the contractor.
Stealing of construction materials and equipment by your workers.
Problems of dealing with the main contractor if you were a subcontractor.
Problems of awarding most of the government contracts to government owned construction firms

Owners failure to meet their contractual commitments on time e.g.
access to land, owner-supplied materials etc.
Problems arising from non-compliance of workers to standard safety rules and regulations.
Owners disregard of contract  commitments by taking arbitrary action.
Difficulties in providing adequate safety measures on site associated with particular construction projects.
Problems associated with reduced work output during fasting and festival periods.
Weather conditions
Problems arising from   accidents on site.
Difficulty in motivating your  workers to work.
A total of 344 responses was received, made up of 266 indigenous contractors (wholly Nigerian owned) representing 78% of the total responses and 78 foreign contractors (either Nigerian branch of a foreign company or Nigeria/Foreign joint venture ), representing 22% of the respondents. The large difference in the 2 categories of responses may suggest a possible bias towards indigenous contractors, however a percentage agreement of 81.5% was recorded, which imply that both groups agree and do indeed face similar problems. From the investigation, out of the 344 respondents to the enquiry, 58 of them (17%) were classified as large scale contractors i.e. with an annual turnover of over N4.0 million.  166 or 49% were classified as medium scale contractors, with annual turnover of between N0.5 million - N4.0 million, while 112 or 32% were classified as small scale contractors with annual turnover of less that N0.5 million. Within the large scale category 72% are foreign contractors and this represents 53% of all the foreign contractors that responded to the enquiry. However the total income of this 9% far exceeded the combined income of the rest of the industry.
A look at the general result indicate that out of the 47 variables identified for this investigation, 34 variables (72%) were classified under the business environment of the construction industry. Of the 18 variables (38.3%) which were considered to be very serious problems to the contractor, or very difficult and occur most of the time with a severity index of 3.5 and above, out of the 47 general variables, 17 were related to the business environment of the construction industry. Obviously any attempt to solve the problems of the construction industry in Nigeria will in major address the business environment of the industry.
The analysis of the results indicate that there is a good agreement between  various categories of contractors as to the factors that contribute greatly to the problem of the construction industry contractors in Nigeria. The lowest percentage agreement of 81.5% was recorded between medium and large scale contractors, small and large scale contractors and between indigenous and foreign contractors, while the highest agreement percentage was 91.9%, recorded between contractors engaged in Civil and Building works. This implies that in general, the contractors were subjected to similar kind of frustration, though at varying degrees, irrespective of whether it is foreign or indigenous, small or large, or even whether it is engaged in Civil or Building Works.
The results further implies that the construction industry in Nigeria is far from emancipation and cannot be said to be developing. This point is in consonance with the observations in other previous related studies (Nigerian Enterprises Promotion Decree 1972; Okpala and Aniekwu (1989a) and its perhaps responsible for efforts of subsequent governments in Nigeria to indigenize the industry, sometimes  through, not so well thought out fiscal and other policies. A construction industry that executes highly complex operations using expatriate personnel and imported technology and materials, may be able to achieve high qualities of construction, but the  value added to construction and the local industries supplying construction inputs will be low. Developing countries need to optimize the values added in the construction industry in order to enhance the efficiency of this investment (Kirmani S, 1988). The very high percentage of 89.4% obtained for variables considered  serious (i.e. with severity index of 2.5 and above), indicate that the Nigerian construction industry is in a very serious trouble. This is also corroborated by the very high response rate to our enquiry of 74%, suggesting a yearning of participants for a possible amelioration, amongst other deductions.
The average Nigerian contractor is a small scale organization (83% of all respondent have annual turnover of less than N4.0 million), mostly un-educated or at least fairly ignorant in modern construction and management techniques, with very limited manpower and unreliable credit facilities. Given his business environment he most probably lacks a sustained work-load to effectively plan for and utilize construction equipment efficiently enough to get good returns on the investment. He also occupies a very disadvantaged position with the major client to the construction industry which is the government, and the government is also the most liable defaulter of construction agreements and procedures. Generally the contractor in the developing country is considered to be a dishonest businessman, who do poor quality work, delay completion of work and try to maximize profit at all costs (Aniekwu and Okpala, 1989a).
The construction industry generally, is becoming increasingly more complex and the boundaries of engineering discipline are becoming less clearly defined. As a result, the forms of contracts currently in use no longer meet the requirements of today's client, a factor that has resulted in the development of the many hybrid forms used by many employers (Marita, 1990). This situation has thus created a very untenable position for the local contractor who is still striving to get used to the traditional construction delivery methods, procedures and framework of which is not suitably adapted to his environment. Thus the productivity of the local contractors in the Nigerian construction industry is significantly lower than that of its foreign counterparts.
The limitations imposed by the scope of this work will not allow a thorough discussion of all the variables that affect the business environment of the construction industry. Some variables have however, been selected for a closer review because they are of primary interest to all participants of the construction industry.
- Problems of delays in receiving payments for completed works (1A) SI = 3.9.
- Owners unwillingness to pay advance for mobilization and purchase of equipment  (3A) S.I. = 36.
- Owners unwillingness to compensate fully for price escalations (3B) S.I. = 3.6
The variables listed above, all relate to problems associated with payment for works undertaken by the contractor as stipulated in the terms of agreement with the client. There is a general consensus that the delays and or unwillingness by clients to make payments as and at when due is a very serious problem in the Nigerian construction industry. The problem of delays in receiving payments for completed works is ranked 8th in the general response with a severity index of 3.9. The small, medium and large scale contractors ranked this variable 5th, 10th and 6th with severity indices of 4.0, 3.9 and 3.7. Despite the differences in ranking it is apparent from the severity indices that all sizes of contractors perceive the problem with a similar level of seriousness. Local contractors ranked it 8th with a severity index of 3.9 while foreign contractors ranked it 7th with a severity index of 3.8. Civil Engineering contractors ranked it 6th with a severity index of 3.8 while Building Engineering contractors ranked it 7th with a severity index of 4.0. This result is also consistent with the known fact that local contractors, small scale contractors and building engineering contractors should perceive the seriousness of this problem similarly and more than the other groups. The common factors between these categories of contractors is that they are mostly small scale contractors with limited cash reserve. They therefore perceive any delays in payments for services rendered as a threat to their very existence, since they are denied of credit to finance or mobilize on other jobs.
The problem of owners unwillingness to pay advance for mobilization and purchase of equipment is ranked 13th, with a severity index of 3.6 by the general response analysis. This variable is also ranked 19th, 11th and 15th with severity indices of 2.9, 3.8 and 3.5 by large, medium and small scale contractors respectively. Civil and building engineering contractors ranked this variable 14th and 11th respectively with severity indices of 3.5 and 3.7, while indigenous and foreign contractors ranked it 12th and 20th with severity indices of 3.7 and 3.1 respectively.
This situation implies that the contractor would have to provide finance for executing the job up-till the time the employer makes interim payment. Given the difficulties associated with securing institutional finances in Nigeria for construction, this situation is extremely crippling especially on the smaller contractors. It not only compels him into destructive indebtedness, it also causes him to do poor quality work and delay completion as he seeks to recover his loses through any means possible. This trend however is as a result of the abuse of the mobilization system by unscrupulous contractors who often connived with equally unscrupulous government officials, collected mobilization fees and other advances without using them for the purposes for which they were meant. The necessary legal requirements for the release of the funds to the contractors are circumvented. The situation became so bad in the 1970's that the government of Nigeria as a matter of deliberate policy canceled the granting of mobilization fees to contractors on government projects. Although provisions were left for granting of advances for certain purchases to beat inflationary trends on some special projects. It is not surprising that foreign and large scale contractors perceived the problem with the least amount of seriousness. They enjoy more credibility with government in the sense that they own properties that serve as collateral and enjoy reputations that will make it seem very unlikely for them to run away with mobilization fees. They also have huge cash reserves and enjoy better credit facilities with the banks and may consequently even be in the position to finance whole projects without requiring mobilization.
The problem of owners unwillingness to compensate fully for escalating costs incurred for reasons beyond the contractors control is perceived seriously by all groups of contractors. It is ranked and weighted similarly, by the general response analysis, Civil Engineering, Building Engineering, Medium scale and indigenous contractors, as the preceding variable. Small scale, large and foreign contractors perceived it more seriously with rankings of 13th, 12th and 13th and severity indices of 3.6, 3.3, and 3.2 respectively. This factor was identified as the most important variable responsible for cost overruns on projects in Nigeria in a similar work conducted by Aniekwu and Okpala (1987) using consultants. This is as a consequence of the very unpredictable high and unstable inflationary tendencies of the Nigerian economy which makes cost estimations quite unreliable over reasonable periods of time. This problem is often compounded by the clients ignorance and lack of appreciation of the contractors role which often leads to his refusal to honour costs justifiably incurred by the contractor as a result of fluctuating costs. This tendency is further encouraged by the rather weakened bargaining position of the contractors in Nigeria which causes the clients to see payments to contractor for services renders as favours to the contractor(s).
All these problems are related to the ease with which payments are made to the contractors for services rendered as stipulated in the terms of contracts. The government in Nigeria is the biggest customer to the construction industry,  accounting for up to 60% of the entire construction output and about 95% of all Civil Engineering works. It has been observed that on government contracts where payments are at best abnormally slow (running into years of overdue) and certificates are not honored within the stipulated time laid down in the contract, contractors often resort to borrowing to finance existing projects and to mobilize new ones. The interests payable on such borrowed money are not catered for in the condition of contract. As at 1984 available statistics put the outstanding debts by the Nigerian government to members of the Federation of Building and Civil Engineering Contractors alone at N1.3 billion ($1=N1.5) (Abiama, 1984). The state of government indebtedness to contractors has since become worse following the deterioration of the Nigerian economy.
These problems can be seen as systemic problems which result from the fact that the contractual arrangement in use in the Nigerian construction industry have not made workable provisions for dealing with the business environment of the Nigerian Construction Industry. The contractual arrangement is based on the premises that a client has enough financial considerations or arrangement to undertake the project and that a contractor has the necessary expertise to execute the project. These premises do not hold true in Nigeria. The government who is the largest customer to the construction industry, proposes construction schemes and budgets over a period of time based on the projections of expected incomes for the period. Often these projections are not realized and at other times adjustments to budgets mid way through the budget period due to unforseen factors causes repudiation and delays to commitments already made. Under such situations payments are delayed and or slashed and in some cases completely repudiated. Agencies of government also maintain similar stances on their commitments which are based on anticipated subvention from the Headquarters. It is also not unusual for unscrupulous officials to sometimes simply delay payments deliberately enough to frustrate the contractor and cause him to offer gratification. Since some government representatives consider personal gains more important than the success of the project, this can be stretched in the case of an uncooperative contractor to the point where the primary objective of the project is destroyed. It has also been observed through personal experience that the government has often used this as a strategy to secure concessions from contractors. The contractors are completely helpless in the situation because of the business environment of the Nigerian construction industry, that does not provide any system of equitable adjudication of such matters. Although the contractual arrangement in use provided for some measure of legal redress, it is not always expedient for the contractor to take necessary legal actions since he is dependent on the goodwill of his clients for subsequent jobs.
There are many forms of contract in use in Nigeria since Nigeria has no recognized form of contract. By the provisions of the Joint Contracts Tribunal (JCT) conditions of contract 1963 edition clause 22 (Joint Contracts Tribunal Guide, 1963), clause 24 of the JCT's 1980 edition, clause 47 of the institute of Civil Engineers (ICE) form of contract 1973 edition (ICE, 1973) and clause 47/1 of the Federation internationale des ingenueurs-conseils (FIDIC) 1977 edition (FIDIC, 1977) and clause 47 of the 1987 edition, the contractor is liable to a payment to the client of liquidated damages calculated at a rate specified for the period between the time of completion and date of practical completion,if he fails to complete the work by the completion date. However, by the provisions of JCT form of contract clause 26, 1963 edition, clause 28 of the 1980 revised edition, clause 69 of FIDIC form of contract, clause 63 of the ICE form and clause 5 of the General Conditions of Government Contracts for Building and Civil works (GC/Works/1 1973), the contractor is advised "to determine the contract if the employer fails to pay amounts due on certificates or obstructs the issue of a certificate or becomes bankrupt or causes continuous suspension of substantial part or whole of the works".
These remedial options provided are open to the employer and the contractor in cases of default. Apart from the provision being one-sided in favour of the employer, since he can apply the liquidated damages clause and so is not forced to determine the contract as his only remedy, the contractor is a business man whose reputation is dependent to an extent on the satisfaction expressed by his various clients on his performance. His subsequent commissions are dependent on his reputation and to that extent he is dependent on the goodwill of his clients for future commissions. It is therefore not in his interest under the circumstance to invoke such a remedy. Thus the client is more at liberty to flout conditions and default in payments without adverse consequences. The FIDIC conditions of contracts and the ICE conditions  stipulate further, "that failure of the client to make payments on certificates as and at when due entitles the contractor interests on overdue amounts and he may not determine the contract". In Nigeria, when these conditions of contract are used government ignores this provision and the contractors seem to acquiesce even in the face of flagrant provocation. The acquiescence mainly highlights the disadvantaged position of the contractors in cases of default by the employers (Aniekwu and Okpala, 1989a).
Provisions of Article 5 of the articles of agreement of the JCT form of contract 1980 edition, clause 35 of the 1963 and 1977 (JCT, 1977) editions, clause 66 of the ICE form of contract, clause 61 of the GC/Works/1, clause 67/3 of the 1987 edition of FIDIC conditions of contract, provides for and stipulates a recourse to and procedures for arbitration in cases of, "disputes or differences between the client or the supervising officer or engineer of architect on his behalf and the contractor during the progress or after completion of the work or abandonment of the work". It further states that the award or decision in such an arbitration shall be final and binding on all the parties. In Nigeria however, it is considered imprudent for a contractor to pursue a dispute with his employer to arbitration level especially if the employer is an organ of government, since the government is the singe largest customer to the construction industry. She is also the custodian of subsequent jobs, so much so that it is a public secret that bribes and "kickbacks" are offered to secure such favours from the employer, obviously dragging him to an arbitration panel will not serve any useful purpose (Aniekwu and Okpala, 1989a).
Delaying payment is the one act of the employer that drives contractors to desperation, ruins their profitability, cripples their professional integrity and inhibits their zeal for doing a good job on time. Yet virtually all employers in developing countries as Nigeria delay payments with impunity. It is futile to talk about developing the construction industry without eradicating this practice. Thus Edmunds and Miles (1983) noted that although construction accounts for a high percentage of Nigerians G.N.P. and constitutes almost half of the total public spending the Nigerian construction industry seems to be slow to benefit from this trend, because the procedure and frameworks on which the indigenous contractors operate are badly adapted to the local needs. The framework is constraining the development of a healthy local industry particularly in the emphasis the system places on the contractor bearing virtually all risks. In developed countries this emphasis is offset by the formidable practical and constructional skills of the contractors including financial and managerial skills which are nonexistent in Nigeria. These procedures were not designed for a developing country like Nigeria. Even in Britain from where most of these procedures originated, there is growing feeling that they may not necessarily be the most suitable for the present day requirements of the British Construction Industry (McCanlis, 1978). Moreover the construction industry is becoming increasingly more complex and the forms of contracts in use can no longer meet the requirement of today's clients adequately, thus various hybrid forms have been developed and used by different client to meet their local needs. Recently the ICE launched "the New Engineering Contract, (NEC), in response to this emergent trend (ICE, 1991).
It is true that the Nigerian construction industry is in deep trouble and has not witnessed any real growth for some time now. It is also true that most of the value-added to construction is lost to the Nigerian construction industry. Previous works by the author and a host of other scholars have identified various problems plaguing the Nigerian construction industry, some of which were classified as structural and systemic problems. It is also true that there is an insufficiency of workable framework for construction delivery in the contemporary construction industry, as a result of very sophisticated clients' demands as evidenced in the proliferation of hybrid delivery systems and forms of contract. The Nigerian construction industry is immersed in all the problems above but in addition is faced with a multi-faceted human problem in her business environment of her construction industry.
The problems and variables identified and discussed does not arise from a lack of adequate legal provisions for resolving their effects, but rather from a lack of the ability to enforce their compliance. It would seem that most laws in Nigeria, including construction laws, which are received from the colonial government, do not command the minimum support required to make them meaningful and place people under obligation to accept them. This is as against the existing situation where people are made to obey. While the later stance could be forced on the society by a dictatorial leadership, the former is voluntary, an acceptance based on the people's conviction only of the justness of the cause.
The effect of this situation on the construction activities is the inability to forecast, estimate or plan with any reasonable levels of confidence or accuracy which is very vital for any construction industry operations. Given this grim scenario, efforts  should perhaps be directed at arriving at a reasonable factor of safety to cushion the contractors from this mass of imponderables.
It is my view that strong contractors/professional associations would be very useful in tackling the problems raised in the discussion, which are both human and technical. The enthusiasm with which contractors responded to the bi-weekly workshop series organized by the Nigerian Society of Engineers (NSE Workshop, 1994), to help educate contractors on various aspects of contract delivery, is very encouraging. Significant successes have also been achieved as evidenced in the revision of the Scale of fees for consultants in the Construction Industry (Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1992), following the agitation of Professional bodies. Without going into details, it is also my suggestion that the payment of advances for mobilization and equipment purchases should be encouraged, but with adequate measures taken to protect the client from loosing such money to unscrupulous contractors. The F.I.D.I.C. conditions of contract 1987 edition Parts I and II would be a useful format for adopting such measures for Nigeria.
Abiama, Gordon  (1984),The Construction Industry-Consultancy  in Tumult. Journal of Tropical Architecture. Dec.1983 - April 1984. Pg. 24 - 29.
Aniekwu, A.N. and Okpala, D.C (1987) Contractual arrangements and the Nigerian Construction Industry (The  Structural 	Components). Journal 	of Construction Management and  	Economics. Vol. 5.  1987.
Aniekwu, A. N. and Okpala, D.C (1988) The effects of systemic factors                        on contract services in Nigeria. Journal of Construction  Management and Economic. Vol.6.1988   Pg.171-182.
Aniekwu A. N. and Okpala D.C (1989) A Survey of the Problems of the  Construction Industry in Nigeria, Vol.II. A Survey Report submitted to the World Bank, Washington D.C. Sept 1989, Pg 1 - 160.
Aniekwu A. N. and Okpala, D.C (1989b) A Survey of the Problems of the Construction Industry in Nigeria, Vol.I. A Survey Report submitted to the World Bank, Washington D.C. Sept 1989, Pg 1 - 195.
Edmonds, G. A. and Miles, D.W.J (1983) Foundations for change. Aspects of  the construction industry in developing countries I. T.  Publications London.
Federal Republic of Nigeria,  (1991) The Nigerian National Construction Policy 1991, Federal Ministry of Works, Lagos.
Federal Republic of Nigeria,  (1992) Professional Scale of Fees for Consultants in the construction
Industry, November 1992, Federal  Ministry of Works, Lagos
F.I.D.I.C. (1977)  Conditions of contract works of Civil Engineering construction 1977. Part I and II, Federation Internationale des ingeneurs, conseils, 3rd edition, 1977.
F.I.D.I.C. 1987 	Conditions of contract for works of Civil Engineering Construction, Parts I and II. Federation Internationale des ingeneurs-conseils. 4th edition, 1987.
GC/Works/1, (1973) General Conditions of Government  	Contracts for Building and Civil Works, Edition 1, 1973, HMSO, London.
I.C.E.  (1973)  Conditions of contract and forms of tender, agreement and bond for works of Civil Engineering construction. Institute of Civil Engineers Press.
I.C.E (1991) New Engineering Contract 1991. A form of contract for engineering and construction projects. The  Institution of Civil Engineering, London 1991.
Kirmani, S. (1988) The construction industry in development issues and options. Discussion paper, Infrastructure and Urban development dept., The World Bank, Report No. INU 10. February 1988.
Marita Thomas  (1990)  Old Methods, New twists for Building Delivery. Journal of Facility Design and Management. March 1990.
McCanlis, E. W. (1978)  Tendering procedures and contractual arrangement chpt. 2 and  Royal institute of chartered surveyors, London.
Nigerian Enterprises Promotion Decree No.4 (1972) .Published in Supplement to Official gazette extraordinary No. 10, Vol.59, 28th Feb. 1972, Part A.
Nigerian Enterprises Promotion Decree No.4 (1989). Published in Supplement to Official gazette extraordinary No. 10, Vol.59, 28th Feb. 1972, Part A.
NSE (1994) Proceedings of the Nigerian Society of Engineers Workshop on Project Management and Monitoring, 23rd - 26th June 1994, Benin City.
NSE (1994) Proceedings of the Nigerian Society of Engineers Workshop on Water Retaining Structures, 14th - 17th  June 1994, Benin City.
NSE (1995) Proceedings of the Nigerian Society of Engineers Workshop on Engineering Maintenance of Equipment and Infrastructure, 4th - 6th July 1995,  Benin City.
NSE (1994) Proceedings of the Nigerian Society of Engineers Workshop on Flood and Erosion Control and Soil Conservation, 11th - 15th July 1994,  Benin City.
Okpala, D. C. and Aniekwu, A.N (1988) Causes of high cost of construction in Nigeria. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management (ASCE) Vol. 114, No. 2, June 1988. Pg. 233 - 244.
Olugbekan O. O. 1991, The Construction Industry and the Nigerian Engineer. Engineering Focus,  Vol.3. Oct-Dec. 1991.
RIBA (1963) Joint Contract Tribunal Guide  Standard form of building contract. RIBA publication, London. RIBA (1980)
Joint Contract Tribunal Guide  Standard form of building contract. RIBA publication, London.
The World Bank Field Office, Lagos (1988), Development of the Construction Industry in Nigeria: A Survey Questionnaire, June 1988, pg 1 - 5.
Wahab K. A. 1977  Improving efficiency in the building sector, West African Technical Review.
Too many changes in the original designs.
Delays by owners or their agents to take decisions at appropriate time.
Unfair bidding procedures and contract awards.
Unrealistic completion schedule imposed by design consultants.
Shortage of materials.
Incompetent and unqualified contractors winning awards.
Dealing with the main contractor, if you were a subcontractor.
Non compliance of workers to standard safety codes.
Non provision of adequate safety measures on site.
Non payment of advances for mobilization and purchase of equipment.
Inability to challenge some of the resident engineer's instructions.
Inadequate procedures for the registration of contractors.
BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT OF THE CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY:
Delays in receiving payments for completed works.
Delay and unfair settlement of disputes between the client and the contractor.
Securing credit on reasonable terms from commercial banks for interim construction financing.
Poor quality of local products.
Lack of standardization of local products.
Shortage of materials.
Lack of testing facilities for local materials.
Gratifying government officials in order to get paid for  	completed works.
Inadequate procedures for the registration of contractors, causing unqualified people to be registered as  construction  contractors.
Delays in delivery of imported materials and equipment.
Clients and consultants interest in the choice of  	subcontractors and suppliers.
Awarding most government contracts to foreign firms.
Awarding most government contracts to government owned  construction firms.
Finding equipment dealers with maintenance services other than those available through dealers.
Importing spare parts, including custom clearance.
Obtaining foreign exchange allocation for purchase of  	equipment.
Obtaining foreign exchange allocation for the purchase of spare parts.
Dealing with the Federal government concerning construction issues.
Dealing with State government concerning construction issues.
Dealing with Local government concerning construction issues.
Dealing with government parastatal concerning construction  issues.
Changing governments.
Changing government officials.
Non payment of advances for mobilization by clients.
Non payment of compensation for price escalation.
Failure to meet contractual commitments on time.
Disregard of contract commitments by taking arbitrary actions.

Reduced work output during festive and fasting periods.
Stealing of construction materials and equipment by workers.
(C) CAPACITY AND EFFICIENCY OF THE CONTRACTOR:
Non performance of subcontractors and nominated suppliers.
Clients/consultants interest in the choice of subcontractor.
Dealing with the main contractor if you were a subcontractor.
Providing adequate safety measures on site.
Motivating the workers.
(D) CAPABLE INSTITUTIONS TO CATER FOR THE PROGRESS OF THE
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY: -                                                                             1. Inability to challenge some of the consultants instructions.
Awarding most government contracts to foreign contractor .
Awarding most government contracts to government owned f rms.
Providing adequate safety measures on site.
View publication stats
