Using Machine Learning to Examine Impact of
Type of Performance Indicator on Flexible Pavement Deterioration Modeling
Limited research has been conducted on the application of data analytics to the prediction of the Pavement Condition Index (PCI) of asphalt roads. More importantly, studies comparing the prediction results of these algorithms with other important performance indicators such as the International Roughness Index (IRI) are rare. This paper aims to train machine learning algorithms to predict the PCI and IRI of asphalt pavement using the Long-Term Pavement Performance (LTPP) database. To this end, 30,274 IRI and 3,227 PCI records were queried and prepared to train the models. The first result of using such an unprecedentedly large training set was a higher accuracy level compared to previous works. For example, the highest cross-validation accuracy for predicting the IRI and PCI numeric values (i.e., R2) was 0.95 and 0.84, respectively, which was the result of a random forest regression algorithm. Classification algorithms were used as well. The accuracy of gradient-boosted trees, for instance, reached 88% and 82%, respectively, when predicting the IRI and the PCI. Even higher accuracy levels were achieved after the data were segmented into separate climatic zones, with dry-and-no-freeze region gaining the highest accuracy. Another finding of this research was that the initial IRI has a larger role in the prediction compared to initial PCI. This observation was confirmed by multiple methods including studying the importance factors of a gradient-boosted trees algorithm and relevant correlation matrices of the attributes. Another important finding about the type of performance indicator was that simpler algorithms, such as linear regression or decision tree, can achieve higher accuracy in predicting the IRI. DOI: 10.1061/(ASCE)IS.1943-555X.0000602. © 2021 American Society of Civil Engineers.
Author keywords: International roughness index (IRI); Pavement condition index (PCI); Performance indicator; Machine learning; Asphalt pavement.
Introduction
Deterioration modeling is crucial to road asset management. Most municipalities and DOTs have developed their own deterioration models for roads. Currently, the most common types of models are deterministic deterioration curves, which are based on age (El-Diraby et al. 2017; Wu 2015) and mechanistic-empirical (M-E) models (AASHTO 2008; Abu Samra et al. 2017; Ayed 2016). Probabilistic models, such as Markov models, are available as well (Ford et al. 2012; Pozzi et al. 2017). Recently, researchers have studied other approaches such as random-parameters logit models (Anastasopoulos et al. 2012a), seemingly unrelated regression equations, and other statistical methods (Anastasopoulos and Mannering 2015; Caliendo et al. 2015; Hong and Prozzi 2010). Fewer studies are available based on machine learning algorithms (Ford et al. 2012; Piryonesi and El-Diraby 2018; Sony et al. 2019).
This lack of popularity of machine learning in deterioration modeling could stem from a few reasons: requiring large data sets for training, high computational demand, and, more importantly,
Instructor, Dept. of Civil and Mineral Engineering, Univ. of Toronto, 35 St. George St., Toronto, ON, Canada M5S 1A4 (corresponding author). madeh.piryonesi@ mail.utoronto.ca 2
Professor, Dept. of Civil and Mineral Engineering, Univ. of Toronto, 35 St. George St., Toronto, ON, Canada M5S 1A4. .org/0000-0001-6446-9199. tamer@ecf.utoronto.ca
Note. This manuscript was submitted on October 9, 2019; approved on October 22, 2020; published online on February 10, 2021. Discussion period open until July 10, 2021; separate discussions must be submitted for individual papers. This paper is part of the Journal of Infrastructure Systems, © ASCE, ISSN 1076-0342.
having a black-box nature (Ford et al. 2012; Piryonesi and El-Diraby 2020a). The first two issues are becoming less significant as more open data and computational power are becoming available. Nonetheless, the black-box nature of machine learning algorithms, especially deep neural networks, has been always a concern (Lipton 2018; Piryonesi and El-Diraby 2018). This study relies on algorithms that are easier to interpret, such as regression and decision trees, and their ensemble version. Over the past two decades, a lot of research has been performed to enhance the interpretability of neural networks and other machine learning algorithms (Lipton 2018; Wu et al. 2008).
According to Piryonesi and El-Diraby (2020a), only a small fraction of the studies conducted on pavement performance modeling are based on the Pavement Condition Index (PCI). The share of the studies conducted on PCI using machine learning is even smaller (Kırbaş and Karaşahin 2016; Piryonesi and El-Diraby 2018, 2020b). The mainstream literature used the International Roughness Index (IRI) or a single distress for modeling because these target variables require less data preparation (Babazadeh and Jafari 2019; Ford et al. 2012; Lou et al. 2001; Moghaddam et al. 2016). For instance, Gong et al. (2018) used a random forest (RF) regression to predict the IRI of Long-Term Pavement Performance (LTPP) roads. Wang (2013) deployed an ordinal logistic regression to predict the area of asphalt cracking using LTPP data. The AASHTO M-E guide is also mostly developed based on the IRI (AASHTO 2008). The use of IRI or a single distress prevails over the PCI in most studies conducted using the LTPP data set (Chen and Zhang 2011; Haider et al. 2007; Kargah-Ostadi et al. 2010; Kargah-Ostadi and Stoffels 2015; Liu and Gharaibeh 2014; Sakhaeifar et al. 2015; Sollazzo et al. 2017; Tabatabaee et al. 2013; Ziari et al. 2016).
Several studies are available on comparing different performance indicators (PIs). Prozzi and Hong (2008) proposed seemingly unrelated regressions to model two performance indicators simultaneously: IRI and rut depth. Anastasopoulos et al. (2012b) used seemingly unrelated equations to compare postrehabilitation behavior of pavement. They used the following PIs: IRI, pavement condition rating (PCR), rut depth, and falling weight deflectometer readings, with PCR having the lowest accuracy in prediction. Sarwar and Anastasopoulos (2016) studied the same set of PIs using a threestage least-square analysis. And Sarwar and Anastasopoulos (2017) used the same three PIs to study the impact of long-term noninvasive pavement degradation on severity rate of road accidents.
There is almost no study comparing the performance of machine learning algorithms when predicting the PCI and IRI. A reason could be the lack of simultaneous data on both performance indicators. For instance, the LTPP database, the world’s largest road performance database, does not include PCI (Elkins et al. 2003; Piryonesi and El-Diraby 2018). This shortage of studies on PCI is not a result of a lack of demand for this performance indicators. In fact, recent studies show that most municipalities in Ontario still use PCI as the main road performance indicator (El-Diraby et al. 2017; Piryonesi and El-Diraby 2019). Also, the Federal Highway Administration reported that many cities in the US use PCI as their primary condition assessment method (FHWA 2017).
This study aims to use machine learning algorithms to predict the deterioration of asphalt pavement. Performance is measured via two of the most popular performance indicators: IRI and PCI. This is the first study comparing the accuracy of algorithms in predicting these two performance indicators. The innovation of this study is not limited to this point and includes several other facets. First, the size of the training set of this study, which contains more than 3,000 PCI and 30,000 IRI examples, is unprecedentedly large and can result in higher accuracy. Second, the features used in this study are based on the recommendations of Piryonesi and El-Diraby (2018), which gave priority to cost-effective features. Third, the developed models could be used in climate change adaptation studies because the predictors include several important climate stressors, and the data are collected over four different climatic regions.
First the data were retrieved and prepared for the PCI, IRI, and predictors. Data retrieval and preparation was performed using SQL and automated by Python. The PCI data are not given in the LTPP database. Therefore, PCI was calculated from the distress data based on the methodology proposed by Piryonesi and El-Diraby (2018). After the data were prepared and erroneous records were removed, 3,227 PCI examples and 30,274 IRI records were used for model training. An example of erroneous data is when under no maintenance the PCI increases dramatically after 3 or 5 years. Another example is a traffic count of zero for an in-service road. When clear historical trends were available, these missing or zero values could be substituted rather than removed.
Two categories of models were trained: classification and regression. Because the target variable must be discrete for classification, the PCI values were discretized according to the ASTM (2015) guideline, and the IRI based on Meegoda and Gao (2014). Because the latter only uses five IRI classes, the PCI classes were also reduced to five for comparison purposes. This was done by merging the lowest three, which means all PCI values lower than 40 were labeled as very poor. The target variable for regression models is the numerical value of future PCI or IRI. The process of model training is schematically shown in Fig. 1.
Type of analysis
Type of attributes	(Machine learning classification/	Future PCI or IRI value/class up
regression)	to 6 years
Initial PCI or
History of maintenance
Satisfactory
Training set	Learning process	Target variable
Overview of model training method.
were given the current condition (IRI or PCI) and a set of predictive features (Table 1) and were trained to predict the future condition class or value up to 6 years.
The predictors used in this study are given in Table 1. This table also includes the mean, standard deviation, minimum, and maximum values for numeric attributes. For target variables, the distributions of the classes are given as well. Predictive features were chosen based on their affordability and ease of collection. This was done by surveying 58 municipalities in Ontario, studying their asset management plans, examining the databases of 10 of them, and interviewing experts. For more details on feature selection process refer to Piryonesi and El-Diraby (2018) and Piryonesi (2019), which are the basis for choosing the attributes of Table 1. Two additional features included in this study are granular base equivalence (GBE), as described by the Transportation Association of Canada (Haas and Kazmierowski 1996), and prediction interval, which is a number between 1 and 6. Incorporating the prediction horizon in the models as a predictive attribute has the benefit of reflecting the time-series nature of the data more realistically. On the other hand, training multiple models for different prediction intervals can provide an opportunity for comparison (Piryonesi and El-Diraby 2020a). Both classification and regression algorithms were used. The algorithms trained in this study include two decision trees, RFs, gradient-boosted trees (GBTs), linear regression, and random forest regression (RFR).
Before starting the analyses, several points about data retrieval and preparation must be elucidated. First, the IRI is reflective of a single profile measured in one of the wheel paths, but the LTPP database includes both right and left wheel paths. While the right wheel path is often reported as the IRI, in this study the mean right and left were used. This average value is sometimes called mean roughness index (MRI) (Smith and Ram 2016). The reason for using the mean roughness is that it represents the roughness of the entire pavement more realistically because there is always a difference between the left and right wheel path values. This difference is shown in Figs. 2 and 3 for two pavement sections in Ontario and Texas, respectively. These road sections are respectively named 87-2311 and 48-0001 in the LTPP database. As shown in these figures, the difference between the values of the right and left wheel paths could vary between −0.2 and 0.2 m=km. So, using the average is an effective way to find the middle ground.
These figures also show how conducting maintenance changed the difference between the right and left wheel paths and the overall/average roughness. In Fig. 2, two sets of maintenance interventions took place in the years 2000 and 2002. They both included crack sealing and patching. In Fig. 3, the maintenance history contains four remedial actions that took place in four different
Predictive attributes, their description, and statistical measures
FREEZE_INDEX_YR

Freeze index for year (Celsius days)
Average of daily maximum air temperatures for year
Average of daily minimum air temperatures for year
FREEZE_THAW_YR

Number of freeze-thaw cycles per year
Thickness of the placed layer in rehabilitation
Average annual daily traffic
Type of last remedial action
Number of years since the last remedial action
Number of conducted remedial actions
Value or class of PCI after 3 years (as categorized by ASTM)
Value or class of IRI after three years [as categorized by Meegoda and Gao (2014)]
Good = 21%, satisfactory =
crack sealing in 1997, patching in 2002, premixed match in 2004, and crack sealing in 2006. Both figures suggest that in most cases these partial maintenance actions not only increased the roughness but also, in some cases, resulted in an increase in the variation between the right and left wheel paths, most probably because they are performed on a certain part of the pavement rather than the entire road surface.
There is another uncertainty source in the IRI data: the variations in the different runs. The LTPP database includes the readings of five passes of a test vehicle during each IRI survey. In this study, the average of these runs was used instead of an individual reading to make the results as comparable as possible to the existing literature (Chandra et al. 2013; Gong et al. 2019; Hall and Crovetti 2007; Meegoda and Gao 2014). However, to show the existing dispersion within each IRI reading, the values of different runs were drawn in box charts in Figs. 4 and 5, which respectively represent Sections 87-2311 and 48-0001. These figures show that the difference between the readings of a single vehicle for the same pavement section could vary between 0.03 and 0.3 m=km. The variance in IRI measurements after maintenance in these figures is not negligible at all. For instance, in Fig. 5, the range of IRI readings in 2007 is larger than the deterioration inflicted on the same pavement section from 1991 to 1999.
The purpose of this discussion and including Figs. 2–5 was not only to clarify the methodology but also to demonstrate that IRI as a performance indicator entails some uncertainty. While it is known that PCI includes an element of subjectivity, little discussion is available on why different surveyors and tools may come up with different numbers for the IRI of the same pavement section. A part of this uncertainty stems from the tools themselves, but the slope of the road and the type of existing distresses can affect this level of uncertainty as well. With regard to data collection tools, in the past, methods like rod and level or Dipstick were more common, and reading more than one number was impractical given their speed. The speed of a Dipstick is 304 m/h (1,000 ft/h) per hour (Face Construction Technologies 2019), which is considerably lower than the speed of a test truck that could reach 80 km=h (Choubane et al. 2002). Such a high speed gives the profiler truck the freedom to measure the IRI in multiple runs and collect more holistic data about the roughness of the road.
Model Training and Evaluation
Models were trained according to Fig. 1 using the attributes of Table 1. Two approaches were used for model evaluation: a 10-fold cross validation and a 1: 10 test–training split. First, the impact of
Dispersion of IRI data within different runs of a test vehicle for a road in Ontario.
data size was studied by testing the accuracy of algorithms trained based on different sizes of training set. The results are shown in Fig. 6 for a C4.5 decision tree predicting five IRI classes. These numbers are the result of a 10-fold cross validation.
Dispersion of IRI data within different runs of a test vehicle for a road in Texas.
Effect of data size on the accuracy of IRI prediction.
shows the mean accuracy, and the error bars represent the standard deviation of accuracy. It was observed that by including more data the mean accuracy increased, and the standard deviation decreased from 7.71% to 0.97%. This figure was developed using five training set sizes: 350, 1,200, 5,000, 15,000, and 30,274.
It is shown in the literature that a GBT outperforms a single tree and a random forest (Hastie et al. 2009; Piryonesi and El-Diraby 2020a). Therefore, we compared the performance of GBT with its base learner. Fig. 7 shows this comparison, in which the ensemble learning algorithm continuously outperforms the base learner. This GBT, which is an implementation of RapidMiner, was trained using 20 base learners for the ease of cross-referencing with the GBT trained by Piryonesi and El-Diraby (2020a) for PCI prediction using the same data set. The number of trees could be increased up to 500 given the large size of the data (Gong et al. 2018). It is known that by increasing the number of trees the accuracy of this algorithm could be boosted dramatically (Gong et al. 2018; Piryonesi and El-Diraby 2020a).
Finally, the informativeness of attributes and their importance in predicting future IRI and PCI class was evaluated. This assessment was performed via the importance factor of GBT. The GBT algorithm computes the importance of each attribute by averaging it over all base learners (i.e., decision trees). So, essentially it is based on the same formulas that the base learners use (Hastie et al. 2009; Provost and Fawcett 2013). For the sake of comparison, the parameters and attributes used by Piryonesi and El-Diraby (2020a) were selected for the GBT algorithm: 20 base learners for predicting the level of IRI after 3 years using the variables of Table 1. The influential attribute. However, this impact is more visible for IRI. The relative importance of other attributes in IRI prediction is almost half when compared to their counterparts for PCI prediction. IRI0 significantly dwarfed other attributes and has a more substantial role in predicting the future roughness.

Importance of different attributes for predicting future: 4 Wet, nonfreeze 86.43  1.99 8,829 and (b) IRI. Aggregate Without segmentation 88.39  0.97 30,274 Fig. 9. Change in IRI values after 3 years (DeltaIRI) for different regions.
different numbers varying up to 0.2 m=km. However, when compared to the PCI, it seems that the models predict the future IRI values more accurately. For instance, in both Figs. 6 and 7 the decision trees have a better performance in predicting the IRI when compared to similar results for PCI prediction by Piryonesi and El-Diraby (2020a). Moreover, the difference between the accuracy of the ensemble learner and the base learner is smaller for IRI prediction. This indicates that overall the IRI is less stochastic in comparison to the PCI. In other words, the former is easier to predict.
This conjecture was also investigated using the correlation matrix of predictive attributes. The relevant correlation coefficients are presented for IRI and PCI, respectively, in Tables 3 and 4. These tables or correlation matrices clearly show that initial PCI and IRI are the most correlated with the target variables. This was also concluded from Fig. 8, which is based on information gain. However, the fact that IRI0 is highly correlated with IRI (the correlation coefficient is 0.89) should be further stressed here.
This observation could fuel the discussion about two points. First, under no maintenance, the IRI is more correlated with its previous values and hence is easier to predict compared with the PCI. This is no surprise because the PCI is a complex measure composed of 21 types of pavement defects. The second point that needs to be discussed is that this correlation value is significantly high when compared to previous studies (AASHTO 2008; Darter et al. 2009; Gong et al. 2018; This is partially because of the larger size of the training set, but even Gong et al. (2018) reported a small R2 and correlation value despite their relatively larger number of data. Because most previous studies gave no clarification about the role of maintenance-related attributes in their models, it could be the case that their lower R2 is due to overlooking the impact of maintenance. This issue is worth further investigation.
The high correlation values of Table 3 motivated the authors to replicate the analyses based on regression algorithms. Moreover, because multiple studies on IRI prediction have used regression algorithms, performing similar analyses can facilitate benchmarking against those works. For this purpose, two regression algorithms were used: linear regression and RFR. The RFR algorithm was trained based on 100 base learners. The evaluation results for a 10-fold cross validation are given in Table 5. It is seen that both algorithms can predict the IRI more accurately than the PCI. Another observation based on Table 5 is that the performance of the ensemble learning algorithm is far superior to the base learner in predicting the
Linear regression
Random forest regression Linear regression
Results of cross validation for two algorithms predicting IRI values
PCI. The same behavior could be observed in Table 3 and Fig. 7, especially when compared to corresponding PCI-related numbers.
In the last step, the accuracy of models in testing unseen data was investigated for both the IRI and the PCI. For this purpose, the data were divided into a training and a test set using a 1∶10 split ratio. The results are shown in Figs. 10–13. The findings are to a large extent similar to the numbers of Table 5. Here too, the resulting R2 was higher for IRI than PCI. The RFR dramatically increased the accuracy of the regression for predicting PCI, but the difference between the linear base learner and the ensemble learner was not as significant for IRI prediction. It means that the relationship between initial and future IRI is more linear and easier to predict using simpler algorithms. Finally, it is worth comparing the results of IRI prediction in this study with previous works based on LTPP data. The R2 of Fig. 10 is substantially higher than the proposed IRI prediction formula by AASHTO (2008) and its locally calibrated versions (Darter et al. 2009; Guo and Timm 2015; Souliman et al. 2010).
The values of coefficients of linear regression models, their range, and their significance levels are given in Tables 6 and 7. Table 6 lists the results for PCI prediction, while Table 7 includes the findings for IRI. The first column shows the variables followed by the values of coefficients and standard error. The P-value column gives the significance of correlations. A confidence level of 95% was used, hence a significance level of 5%. Therefore, Table 6 shows that all variables are significantly correlated with PCI except for freeze index and total precipitation, which have P-values above 0.05. The table also presents the upper and lower limits of coefficients with a confidence level of 95%. According to Table 7, all variables are significantly correlated with IRI except for total precipitation and number of maintenance actions.
Predicted IRI by random forest regression versus actual IRI value.
Predicted PCI by random forest regression versus actual PCI value.
The use of linear regression may be restrictive because simple linear regression models, and other methods, do not account for the effect of unobserved factors, also known as unobserved heterogeneity (Fountas et al. 2018; Lagzi et al. 2017; Mannering 2018; Mannering et al. 2016; Mannering and Bhat 2014; Rahmani and Behdinan 2017). This problem can impose limitations to the predictability of the linear regression models. So, the cross evaluation of simple and random forest approaches may not be completely fair. The use of linear regression in this study had only three points: first, making the results comparable to previous works based on regression algorithms; second, contrasting the difference between a single learner and an ensemble of learners; and third, comparing the correlation between the initial and final values of performance indicators. Nonetheless, the random parameters of linear regression models can be estimated using other methods, which can account for unobserved heterogeneity to an extent (Anastasopoulos et al. 2012b; Barua et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2017; Ma et al. 2017; Pantangi et al. 2019; Zangeneh et al. 2020). This task is, however, beyond the scope of this paper.
Considering the numbers in Fig. 8 and Tables 3 and 4, one may notice how the initial value of the performance indicators is the most influential in predicting their future values or classes. So, the question of what is the point of keeping the climatic attributes may arise. After all, Occam’s razor is true about models too, and a good model is a simple one (Hastie et al. 2009; Provost and Fawcett 2013). Another question is why these variables were not replaced with other more informative attributes.
First, the climatic features were chosen to be consistent with the existing literature. Temperature, precipitation, and freeze-thaw cycles are listed among the main climate stressors by previous researchers who studied the impact of climate (AASHTO 2008; Anyala et al. 2014; Chinowsky et al. 2013; Darter et al. 2009; Dewan and Smith 2002; Guo and Timm 2015; Li et al. 2009; Neumann et al. 2015; Qiao et al. 2015). Also, a comparison between the findings of classifiers in predicting PCI and IRI would be impossible without keeping the attributes used by Piryonesi and El-Diraby (2020a).
Second, while the score of informativeness or importance vary from one algorithm to another, generally the climatic variables are not insignificant. For instance, in Fig. 8, maximum temperature and precipitation are the third and fourth most important attributes. Also, these importance factors or correlations should not be interpreted as causal and/or linear relationships because different algorithms define importance very differently. For example, while precipitation is very important in predicting using entropy (i.e., tree-based algorithms) it may not be as important when using correlation (see Tables 6 and 7 and the P-value for precipitation). For a more comprehensive comparison of informativeness of different attributes using different algorithms, refer to Piryonesi and El-Diraby (2020a).
Finally, a point about the types of models needs clarification. One should pay attention that the two categories of models developed in this study (i.e., classification and regression) were developed independently. Both categories were used to make the paper as comprehensive as possible. Indeed, the choice of model is not a trivial matter, and it is not the topic of this paper.
Regression coefficients and their significance for PCI prediction
FREEZE_INDEX_YR
FREEZE_THAW_YR
OVERLAY_TICKNESS
and their significance for IRI p

FREEZE_INDEX_YR
FREEZE_THAW_YR
OVERLAY_THICKNESS
category has its own advantages, model selection needs careful judgment based on specific circumstances and the type of problem. For instance, in cases that the identification underestimation or overestimation is vital, a classification model may serve better (Hastie et al. 2009; Piryonesi and El-Diraby 2018).
Nonetheless, one may ask about a situation in which the regression model predicts a value that does not coincide with the class or label predicted by the classification model. The answer to this question lies in two measures: first, the model accuracy; and second, the probability of belonging to a class. First, when comparing two models, the more accurate one should always be chosen. Accuracy should not be reduced to a one-number assessment. For a discussion on this issue, see Piryonesi and El-Diraby (2020a). The second criterion is the probability of belonging to a class. Two examples are discussed to clarify the notion of probability of belonging. A roadway is predicted to have a PCI of 86.2 when using a regression model, but the classifier predicts a satisfactory class (70 < PCI < 85) with the following class probabilities: satisfactory ¼ 44%; verypoor ¼1%. Compare this example with another in which the regression predicted 86.1 for PCI and the classifier predicted satisfactory class but with the following probabilities: satisfactory ¼88%; verypoor ¼1%. Clearly, in the second example, the classifier has a higher confidence in its prediction. This important feature of machine learning models is ignored when they are treated as deterministic models. Sometimes in reality the boundary between two classes is not as crisp and clear. Road condition prediction is no exception. This vagueness could be navigated using a fuzzy classifier that can handle the notion of belonging to a class using a membership function.

In this study the data for LTPP road sections were retrieved and prepared to train models for IRI and PCI prediction. Both classification and regression algorithms were used. Decision trees and GBT were used to predict the level of future IRI and PCI out of five classes. Linear regression and RFR were used to predict the numeric values of these performance indicators. The accuracy of the trained models was higher than previous studies. This higher accuracy could be a result of preparing a larger training set and a more systematic data preparation and cleaning. When comparing the performance of the models in predicting different performance indicators, in almost all cases the accuracy for IRI prediction was higher. Another conclusion was that theweak learners (i.e., decision tree and linear regression) have a closer performance to their ensemble learning algorithm when predicting the IRI. In other words, IRI was easier to predict, whereas PCI prediction was better improved by using more complex algorithms. Furthermore, the impact of initial IRI in prediction was bolder than that of initial PCI. These observations suggest that the initial IRI is highly correlated with future IRI, and this correlation is more significant than the relationship between PCI0 and future PCI. With regard to other predictive attributes, the role of the last type of maintenance was the most important. This feature was the second most important in predicting the IRI and the third in PCI prediction. Segmenting the data into climatic regions increased the accuracy of IRI and PCI prediction, and the highest accuracy was recorded for Climatic Region 2, with a dry and no-freeze climate.
The findings of this study open the door to several interesting future research questions. First, the informativeness analyses showed that the attributes related to maintenance history were among the most informative attributes. This necessitates further study on the impact of different maintenance regimes and asset management approaches on long-term behavior of pavement. Second, achieving higher R2 values for IRI prediction, even with more affordable attributes, necessitates an overview of past studies and reexamining the data preparation approach. Finally, incorporating several important climate stressors in the model and developing the models over multiple climatic regions can open the door to more realistic climate change adaptation and resilience analyses. However, when conducting such analyses, the limitations in climate projection and the range of climatic variables must be considered and addressed properly. Furthermore, some adaptations are needed to consider the impact of traffic change and extreme weather events in the model.
Some or all data, models, or code generated or used during the study are available from the corresponding author by request. These items include parts of the cleaned and prepared IRI data, PCI data, traffic, climatic attributes, and maintenance data.
