Expert Systems With Applications 191 (2022) 116283
Centre for Information Systems in Infrastructure and Construction, Civil Engineering Department, University of Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A4, Canada
A R T I C L E I N F O  	A B S T R A C T
Road maintenance policy-making
Maintenance cost optimization Network PCI
A framework was proposed to find optimal maintenance policies in a road network. The framework included: identifying factors that contribute to policy-making; clustering the network based on these factors; identifying criteria that impact optimal policies; and determining optimal policies and periods using these criteria. To test the framework applicability, it was applied to Iran roads network step-by-step. First, road functional class and climate were identified as factors that contribute to policy-making. Second, the network was clustered into six sub-networks based on two road functional classes and three climates. maintenance cost, network condition, and maintenance period were identified as criteria that impact optimal policies. Fourth, 96 maintenance policies were applied to each sub-network considering two-year, four-year, six-year, and twelve-year maintenance periods. To quantify policies cost, seven machine-learning algorithms including Gradient Boosting Regression, Lasso, Ridge, Random Forest Regression, Elastic Net, Neural Network, and Multiple Linear Regression were tested. Using the coefficient of determination (R2) as the accuracy metric, it was found that in all sub- networks the Gradient Boosting Regression had the highest accuracy on testing set (greater than 90%) while that of other algorithms was between 50% and 90%. Sub-networks condition was modeled using the Markov Chain model and was measured by the average Pavement Condition Index (PCI). Having policies cost and sub-networks PCI, the optimal policy was selected using the Technique for Order of Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution (TOPSIS). It was concluded that in all sub-networks, the four-year maintenance period was optimal. Roads in warm zone demanded the most intense policies, followed by those in cold and humid zones. The same applied to arterial roads followed by local ones.
Introduction
Road agencies should establish a sustained maintenance policy. Such a policy clarifies funding needs and creates stability in the road maintenance program. However, it is challenging to formulate such a policy given the complexity of decisions to be made: How often and where should maintenance work be implemented? What maintenance intervention at which road segment can yield a target PCI and, at the same time, minimize overall budget? A multitude of factors impact formulating such policies—for example, traffic volumes, costs of maintenance interventions, the applicability of an intervention to a certain segment with a specific PCI, and road sections deterioration. Apart from traffic loads; material ageing; and construction deficiencies, the rate of deterioration of each road section also depends on local environmental factors, e.g. local climate (Si, Ma, Li, Ren, & Wang, 2014). Since multiple criteria factor into road maintenance policy-making,
* Corresponding author.
Received 29 September 2020; Received in revised form 27 October 2021; Accepted 21 November 2021   Available online 29 November 2021
0957-4174/© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
the researchers in the field have mostly relied on optimization models to find optimal maintenance policies. Most of the criteria that contribute to road maintenance policy-making are stochastic in nature. However, due to a lack of data to model them several approximations have occurred while quantifying them. For example, using deterministic values, e.g. unit costs, to represent maintenance cost (Khiavi & Mohammadi, 2018). This approach may work well for a small road network or a short-term policy-making. For large road networks, using deterministic approximations is not recommended. Due to their higher prediction accuracy, machine-learning algorithms could be a suitable alternative in this regard (Peraka & Biligiri, 2020), particularly if large datasets are available (typically the larger the dataset, the more accurate the machine-learning algorithms). Since these algorithms could analyze both structured and unstructured data (Piryonesi and El-Diraby, 2020a, 2020b), they can easily quantify a dependent criterion, e.g. cost, in terms of other independent variables that are available in the database.
Moreover, they are evolutionary, i.e. every time the data changes the output gets updated accordingly (Piryonesi & El-Diraby, 2019). Since a large dataset containing real cost data was available in this study, machine-learning algorithms have been used to predict the cost of maintenance policies in the short, medium, and long terms.
The objective of this paper was to develop a data-driven approach to determine the most cost-effective and the most efficient (in terms of road condition) maintenance policies for sub-networks of a road network that contain similar road segments, rather than recommending the same policy for the whole network. To this end, a framework was developed to facilitate generating a network-level road maintenance policy. Using the framework, policy-makers can define similar road segments where the same type of maintenance work can be applied and is likely to yield optimal performance. They can study how often these maintenance actions should take place. A range of maintenance frequencies was explored. The most aggressive option was to conduct the most appropriate action to each segment every two years. This, on average, would include light interventions. The least aggressive option was set to a frequency of 12 years, i.e. more of a deferred maintenance scenario. This, as expected, would include more frequent use of intense interventions in too many segments. To test the applicability of the framework, it was applied to the case of Iran roads network. Two important criteria were included in the framework. First, network-level roadway condition. In each policy, the average PCI for the whole network was examined. Second, the network-level cost of maintenance policy. The studied network was split into six clusters mainly to isolate the impact of road functional class and climate. The former could be helpful in adding levels of service to the overall consideration. A core assumption in this regard was that major roads serve more customers and therefore maintaining them would have a more profound impact on user satisfaction. The latter could formulate the impact of climate on maintenance policy. 96 policies were applied to each cluster over two- year, four-year, six-year, and twelve-year periods. The network PCI and cost of each iteration were respectively calculated using the Markov Chain and Gradient Boosting Regression models. The use of other machine-learning algorithms including Lasso, Ridge, Random Forest Regression, Elastic Net, Neural Network, and Multiple Linear Regression was also examined. Finally, the optimal policy for each maintenance period and cluster was identified using TOPSIS. To examine the value of the proposed framework, a survey of road maintenance experts was conducted.
The literature on road maintenance policy-making could be mapped over six dimensions as shown in Fig. 1. First, the policy-making level that could be project-level or network-level (Guo, Gregory, & Kirchain, 2020). Second, policy-making criteria. In reality, a countless number of criteria contribute to policy-making. However, it is almost impossible to consider all of them, and therefore, policy-makers need to select the most influential ones (Yu, Gu, Ni, & Guo, 2015). Third, defining policies that are typically linked to assigning proper maintenance interventions to road sections based on their condition (Khiavi & Mohammadi, 2018). Fourth, policy-making period, which could be single-period (making policies only for a single period of time. Once the period ends, new policies are needed) or multiple-period (one-time policy-making for multiple periods of time). Fifth, modeling types of criteria. This spans deterministic models (Ansarilari & Golroo, 2020) that are the most widely-used, stochastic models (AASHTO, 2012), models based on experts’ inputs (Ansarilari & Golroo, 2020), and other modeling types. Sixth, modelling tools that could be unit indices of the criteria (Khiavi & Mohammadi, 2018), artificial intelligence such as machine-learning algorithms, subjective tools (Ansarilari & Golroo, 2020), and others. In what follows, these dimensions are elaborated in detail. Note that the red rectangles in Fig. 1 represent the existing research gaps in the corresponding dimensions. The main motivation of the authors of the present paper was plugging these gaps to the possible extent, i.e. using machine-learning algorithms to stochastically predict the cost of maintenance policies and integrating it with the Markov Chain model to develop multiple-period and perpetual road maintenance policies.
Hierarchy of road maintenance policy-making dimensions (Asterisked items inside red rectangles represent research gaps). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Road maintenance policy-making could be done at project or network levels. In project-level, policy-makers decide which maintenance intervention is to be conducted on a single road section. This approach provides road section-specific maintenance interventions, and therefore, promotes heterogeneity across the entire road network. It also could be done over an immediate-term or a multi-year period. The latter provides for clear funding and maintenance horizons and can keep the pavement in a better condition (Wu, Flintsch, Ferreira, & Picado-Santos, 2012). Network-level policy-making is essential to public policy-makers. They need to see the trade-offs between budgets and levels of service and work on securing sustained financial resources. The bottom line of an ideal network-level road maintenance policy is to keep as many road sections as possible at satisfactory technical and road-user levels of service. However, a drawback of the network-level policy-making is that the road sections in a network do not necessarily share the same properties, e.g. functional class, age, maintenance history, etc.
Computational complexity is another drawback as well (Hankach, Lorino, & Gastineau, 2019).
Maintenance cost has been a dominating analysis criterion in previous studies, mainly because insufficient funding poses pervasive problems to road maintenance agencies. For example, the backlog in maintaining the existing highways in the USA is approximately 420 billion dollars (Guo et al., 2020). Additional criteria typically included road condition (Augeri, Greco, & Nicolosi, 2019), environmental impact (Yu et al., 2015), pavement residual value (Khiavi & Mohammadi, 2018), safety (Janstrup, Møller, & Pilegaard, 2019), and construction schedule (Fwa, Chan, & Hoque, 2000). Maintenance period, which is a key criterion and essential to sustained policy-making, has not received adequate attention. Does the policy optimize the condition and costs over a short, long, or perpetual period of time? Also, how frequently should maintenance policies be done? The first question is important to politicians and economists to help establish sustained funding mechanisms. The second helps road agency leaderships to plan maintenance and resource optimization. In many cases, the lack of access to realistic/ actual cost data or organizational resistance to alter the current maintenance policies were the reasons for not considering sustained policies.
Maintenance interventions are typically clustered into do-nothing, routine maintenance, preventive maintenance, light rehabilitation, medium rehabilitation, and heavy rehabilitation (Khiavi & Mohammadi, 2018). A road maintenance policy is defined as assigning a maintenance intervention to a road section (Chen, Henning, Raith, & Shamseldin, 2015; Mahpour & El-Diraby, 2021). Formerly, this assignment used to be subjectively based on experts’ inputs and past experiences (Guo et al., 2020) due to the lack of structured programming, optimization, computational, and mathematical foundations. For instance, a brand- new 15′′ pavement segment will always undergo two medium re-
habilitations over its lifespan. However, thanks to the recent advances in these disciplines, and according to the current viewpoints, a policy is prudent if it trades offs the aforementioned criteria against each other (Gosse, Smith, & Clarens, 2013; Jato-Espino, Rodriguez-Hernandez, Andres-Valeri, ´ & Ballester-Munoz, 2014˜ ). The Kansas Department of Transportation is an example that has incorporated this approach into its pavement management system (Khiavi & Mohammadi, 2018). A balance between criteria could be achieved through applicable decision-making tools (Chou, 2009; Wei et al., 2020) e.g. dynamic programming (Ansarilari, Yeganeh, & Golroo, 2016), dynamic system modelling (Tarefder & Rahman, 2016), decision support systems (Irfan, Khurshid, Iqbal, & Khan, 2015; Ramachandran, Rajendran, & Amirthalingam, 2019), fuzzy methods (Moazami, Behbahani, & Muniandy, 2011; Pan, Ko, Yang, & Hsu, 2011), and artificial intelligence algorithms (Dragovan, Rukavina, & Domitrovic, 2014; Hassan, Siddiqui, Mazhar, & Hameed, 2019). The policy can also be developed as a one-off option, i.e. a one-time implementation, or a perpetual option, i.e. repeated implementation over an extended period of time.
Evolutionary-based genetic algorithms have dominated the current road maintenance policy-making realm. This could be due to their inherent simplicity and flexibility. For example, Sindi & Agbelie, 2020 benchmarked the mixed-integer programming against the genetic algorithm in identifying optimal road maintenance interventions. The objectives of both optimization modules were maximizing service life and minimizing costs. They reported that the genetic algorithm outputs more optimal maintenance solutions. Ansarilari & Golroo, 2020 developed an integrated airport pavement management using a hybrid approach of supervised genetic algorithms and the Markov Chain model. The objectives were minimizing maintenance costs and maximizing the pavement condition. Mahmood, Mathavan, & Rahman, 2018 developed a parameter-free discrete particle swarm algorithm to solve multi- objective optimization problems. They applied their customized algorithm to a network-level pavement maintenance problem; and detected enhancements in analysis time and quality of optimal solutions compared to genetic and other particle swarm algorithms.
Mohammadi, 2018 developed a deterministic model to minimize road- user and agency costs and maximize pavements’ residual value. They studied a pavement network with a total length of 85 km as a case and solved their model using the Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm- II. Santos, Ferreira, & Flintsch, 2017 deployed a genetic algorithm-based search heuristic to solve a decision-support system to improve the sustainability of an interstate highway in Virginia, USA. The examined objectives included minimizing greenhouse gas emissions as well as road-user and agency costs. Similarly, Tahan, Bekheet, Khalek, & Hafez, 2016 studied cost and network condition and used a Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm to develop a maintenance model for the Egyptian highway network. Yu et al. (2015) studied the development of asphalt pavement maintenance plans at the project level. Their objectives included maximizing pavement performance and minimizing cost and environmental pollutions. This multi-objective problem was solved by the genetic algorithm.
The validity of a road maintenance policy depends on the reliability of the adopted road deterioration-and-improvement model (Chen, Dong, Gu, & Mao, 2019; Mohammadi et al., 2019; Bannour et al., 2019). This model should be founded on historical data (Ansarilari & Golroo, 2020), but, if no historical data is available, it could be developed based on experts’ opinions and inputs. Indeed, Pavement Management Guide (AASHTO, 2012) classifies deterioration-and-improvement models into deterministic, probabilistic/stochastic, Bayesian, and subjective/expert- based models. In the reviewed literature, a number of deterioration-and- improvement models based on neural network (Thube, 2012; Yao, Dong, Jiang, & Ni, 2019) and probit function (Madanat, Karlaftis, & Mccarthy, 1997) have also been proposed. However, the models that grab the greatest attention are the deterministic and probabilistic ones, which are commonly referred to as the basic groups (Abaza, 2016). Although deterministic ones are even more widely-employed, probabilistic models can incorporate uncertainty in pavement performance, which is closer to reality. Among probabilistic/stochastic models, the Markov Chain model is the most widely-used one for simulating road deterioration and improvement (P´erez-Acebo, Mindra, Railean, & Rojí, 2019). This could be due to its simplicity, high speed, and efficiency at network-level calculations (Arce & Zhang, 2021). The high number of related publications bears testimony to this statement. For instance, P´erez-Acebo et al. (2019) used a Markov Chain model and half-yearly International Roughness Index data of Portland cement concrete roads in the Republic of Moldova. They showcased how network-level transition probability matrices of rigid pavements could be developed in the absence of frequently-used yearly PCI data. In another study, Issa and Schoefs (2020) used a Markov Chain model to predict the deterioration of rigid, semi-rigid, and mixed pavements in Western France. They developed two-to-six-year transition probability matrices and assessed uncertainty in deterioration propagation through studying the means and standard deviations of different cells. For additional related publications, one could refer to Osorio-Lird, Chamorro, Videla, Tighe, and Torres-Machi (2018) and Lethanh and Adey (2013) among many others.
However, the following gaps that remain under-explored in the reviewed literature are addressed in the present paper: (1) Studies on the maintenance period: The existing literature spans different criteria (e.g. cost, condition/performance, environment, safety, etc.) and different policy-making levels (i.e. project-level or network-level). An important decision-making criterion that has mostly been disregarded is the maintenance period. A policy that can be repeatedly implemented creates consistent and stable maintenance horizons. However, the previous studies mostly focused on a single-period policy-making. For example, Khiavi and Mohammadi (2018) predicted maintenance interventions for 17 sections of two-lane roads with a total length of roughly 85 km over a 20-year period. In another study, Yu et al. (2015) predicted maintenance interventions for a one-km long road section over a 40-year period. Similarly, Herabat and Tangphaisankun (2005) predicted maintenance interventions for 153 road sections in Thailand over a 30-year period. In short, repeatable multi-period network-level policy-making is an important research gap; (2) Stochastic quantification of the criteria:
Number of Road Sections Transiting from State i to State j
Total Number of Road Sections Undergoing the Maintenance Intervention
Stochastic quantification, in contrast to the dominant deterministic quantification, would result in more realistic policy-making. In most of the reviewed studies, the investigated criteria; e.g. cost, environmental parameters, and safety indicators; while stochastic in nature, were reduced to single-valued parameters; (3) Machine-learning algorithms: To the best of the authors’ knowledge, almost no study has used machine-learning algorithms to develop stochastic models of the examined criteria. Machine-learning algorithms are supposedly superior To predict the future condition of a road network via a Markov Chain model, transition probability matrices were needed to be assembled. The value of cell ij in the transition probability matrix of a specific maintenance intervention, TPMij, was the probability that roads with the current state of i transitioned to the future state of j (Ansarilari & Golroo, 2020). This probability could be calculated based on Eq. (1):
to deterministic models due to their higher accuracy and evolutionary nature, particularly in the case of large datasets. It is because the larger the dataset, the more accurate the machine-learning algorithms. These gaps could be attributed to the limitations imposed by modelling algorithms or lack of data. For example, genetic algorithms need far more time to solve multi-period policy-making problems compared with single-period ones and it could be a good reason for the popularity of single-period policy-making researches. Furthermore, the studied criteria either were subjective and difficult to measure or suffered from a lack of reliable structured data, which did not allow the researchers to quantify them stochastically. Finally, the existing datasets might be small which did not allow the application of machine-learning algorithms in practice.
Modeling the problem
In what follows, the theoretical background of the models/methods used in this paper is explained. These models/methods served two important needs: 1) Predicting the post-maintenance condition of the network, and 2) Selecting an optimal policy that enhances network PCI and reduces maintenance cost.
The Markov Chain model
The Markov Chain model is a simple and effective tool (Privault, 2018) to simulate a road network deterioration. In this model, the condition of a road section is assessed based on discrete states (P´erez- Acebo et al., 2019) that facilitate estimating the road network PCI. As shown in Fig. 2, four states were defined in this paper according to ASTM D6433-18: good, satisfactory, fair, and unacceptable. It is worth noting that all road sections that had a PCI below 55 were categorized into one state as they were not capable of being used.
If no maintenance intervention is conducted, the elements below the main diagonal of TPMij are zero. This signifies the idea that the condition of road sections cannot improve in the absence of maintenance interventions. Moreover, when no maintenance intervention has been applied, the element jj equals one due to the holding state. In other words, road sections that are in the worst condition, cannot deteriorate further (Ortiz-García, Costello, & Snaith, 2006). These explanations about the do-nothing scenario could be summarized in Eq. (2):
Finally, if any maintenance intervention is done, the improvements will be indicated in elements ij, when j > i (P´erez-Acebo et al., 2019).
In this paper, a policy was defined as a series of maintenance interventions that are to be applied to the quadruple states defined in Fig. 2. Then, transition probability matrix of a policy was developed by integrating the corresponding rows of transition probability matrices of maintenance interventions. For example, if A, B, C, and D respectively represent preventive maintenance, light rehabilitation, medium rehabilitation, and heavy rehabilitation, policy AACD indicates that maintenance interventions A, A, C, and D are to be applied to road sections in states 1, 2, 3, and 4. Fig. 3 illustrates how the transition probability matrices of maintenance interventions A, C, and D should be integrated to assemble that of policy AACD.
Table 1 summarizes the typical activities that each maintenance intervention includes.
Finally, the network PCI after applying L maintenance policies, PCINetwork, could be found using Eq. (3):
Deterioration states defined in the present paper.
Transition probability matrices of maintenance interventions A, C, and D and policy AACD.
Description of maintenance interventions (Gharaibeh et al., 2014).
Description of Typical Activities
Surface treatments, e.g. fog sealing, chip sealing, thin overlays, rut filling, crack sealing, and seal coat (applying one, two, or three layer(s) of asphalt material covered with fine or coarse aggregates to a pavement). These interventions normally restore surface friction, seal low- severity cracks, and waterproof the pavement surface course.
Light Rehabilitation
Mill and overlay (thickness between 2′′ and 3′′); hot mix asphalt overlay (thickness between 2′′ and 3′′); mill and inlay; base repair, seal, and/or level up.
Subgrade repair with cement and geogrid; base repair, seal, and/or level up; mill and overlay (thickness between 3′′ and 5′′); mill and inlay.
Full-depth base repair; base repair, rehabilitation, and overlay; Scarify, add base, and resurface/seal.
PCINetwork = P0: 4×4 × PCIStates:

1×4 is the initial probability vector of the road network, e.g. if 20%, 35%, 40%, and 5% of roads of a network are initially in states 1, 2, 3, and 4 respectively, then P0: 1×4 = [0.20,0.35,0.40, 0.05].
4×4 is the transition probability matrix of the lth maintenance policy.
▪ PCIStates: 4×1is the matrix of mean ⎡ of PCI intervals of the ⎤
quadruple states shown in Fig. 2, ⎢⎢⎢⎢ 70.00 +2 55.00 = 62.50 ⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥.
The algorithm develops an additive prediction model in a forward stage-wise manner. The developed model is an ensemble of simple predictions made by sub-models. Normally, a set of decision trees are used to develop predictions. Not all of them have the same accuracy. However, some of them have very high accuracy for certain profiles of data. The ensemble algorithm uses different methods to select and combine the results of these trees based on optimizing an arbitrary but differentiable error function. This optimization is done by repeatedly selecting a weak hypothesis that points in the negative gradient direction. Consequently, the algorithm boosts accuracy as it gets applied repeatedly (Natekin & Knoll, 2013).
In multi-criteria decision-making problems, there is no unique solution that satisfies all criteria simultaneously. The Pareto frontier approach identifies a set of non-dominated solutions that outperform other ones, i.e. at least one criterion is optimized. The studied criteria in this paper were PCINetwork and cost. Therefore, once the outcomes of each policy were identified, the next task was to find the non-dominated solutions, i.e. policies that either led to a higher PCINetwork or were less expensive.
The ideal non-dominated solution could be selected by different multi-criteria decision-making tools. Due to the limited number of examined non-dominated solutions and criteria, TOPSIS as a versatile method (Mahpour, 2018; Papathanasiou & Ploskas, 2018), was used in this paper. This method has the following steps:
▪ Determining the number of non-dominated solutions, n, and criteria, m. In this paperm = 2 because two decision criteria, i.e. PCINetwork and cost, were studied.
▪ Developing the decision matrix, Xn×m, where rows were non- dominated solutions and columns were criteria.  ▪ Developing the normalized decision matrix, Rn×m, based on Eq.
▪ Developing the weighted normalized decision matrix, Vn×m, based on Eq. (5):
wj = weight of the jth criterion;
▪ Finding the zenith and nadir points, A+ and A− respectively, based on Eq. (6):
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪ A,vm− ); ⎩ v	ii((vvijij)); ifif theitheithth criterioncriterionhashastotobebemaximizedminimized
▪ Calculating the distance between the zenith (nadir) point and each non-dominated solution, di+ (di− ), as well as the closeness coefficient, Ci, based on Eq. (7):
▪ The ideal non-dominated solution was that with the highest Ci (Ishizaka & Nemery, 2013).
The objective of this paper was to advance a data-driven methodology to determine the optimal maintenance policies for a road network by means of plugging the identified research gaps. The most important gaps that were addressed included the domination of single-period policy-making, the lack of stochastic quantification of criteria, and disregarding the maintenance period. The novelties of the proposed methodology are building machine-learning algorithms and paving the way for stochastic quantification of maintenance cost using real cost data; incorporating the maintenance period into the optimal policy selection; and contributing to sustainable development goals #9, #11, and #13. To plug the aforementioned research gaps, the adopted methodology consisted of a framework followed by a case study to test its applicability. To validate the research findings, a questionnaire survey of road maintenance experts was done. In what follows, a brief overview of the framework, the case study, and the survey is outlined. Then, in the subsequent sections, these steps are further elaborated.
The framework included four steps: (1) identifying the major factors that contribute to the road maintenance policy-making, (2) clustering the road network based on the contributing factors, (3) identifying criteria that factor into optimal policies, and (4) determining the optimal policies and periods using the optimization techniques and based on the identified criteria.
Case Study: To test the applicability of the framework, it was applied to the case of Iran roads network step-by-step. In the first step, road functional class and climate were identified as the major factors that contribute to the maintenance policy-making. In the second step, the whole network was clustered based on two road functional classes (A: arterial, L: local) and three climate zones (C: relatively warm and humid, W: warm and dry). In the third step, the maintenance cost, the network condition, and the maintenance period were identified as the criteria that factor into optimal policies. In the fourth step, 96 maintenance policies were defined and applied to each sub-network.
this end, two-year, four-year, six-year, and twelve-year maintenance periods were examined over a twelve-year decision horizon. To quantify the cost of maintenance policies, seven machine-learning algorithms including Gradient Boosting Regression, Lasso, Ridge, Random Forest Regression, Elastic Net, Neural Network, and Multiple Linear Regression were evaluated and the most accurate one was chosen. Sub-networks condition was modeled using the Markov Chain model. The road performance was measured by the average Pavement Condition Index (PCI) of the whole sub-network. Having policies cost and sub-networks PCI as the decision-making criteria, the optimal policy was selected using the Technique for Order of Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution (TOPSIS). TOPSIS is a well-known multi-criteria decision-making tool and was chosen because of its simplicity, clarity, and ease of use by practitioners.
Questionnaire Survey: To evaluate the value of the proposed framework, road maintenance experts were invited to assess the applicability of the framework and the adopted methodology. The questionnaire addressed three main areas: (1) the link between the proposed framework and sustainability management, (2) the applicability of the framework, and (3) an assessment of the results of the case study.
The proposed framework follows a traditional four-step approach as shown in Fig. 4. First, a set of major factors that contribute to the road maintenance policy-making are to be identified. Clustering the data is of particular importance in this paper as it helps detect road sections that are similar and could be maintained similarly. Therefore, in the second step of the framework, several schemes to cluster the data should be examined to make sure that any biased or systematic problems in data are detected. This requires cleaning the data and complementing missing data. The proposed framework is a data-driven one. Therefore, as typical with data science analyses, the third step is identifying the criteria that factor into optimal policies and a typical optimization problem based on the identified criteria. For the optimal policy selection, multi-criteria decision-making tools could be used.
In summary, the final framework conducts the following tasks:
The proposed framework.
The case study procedure (Highlighted steps were to be repeated in each iteration).
Road Section
▪ Direction
▪ Maintenance Intervention  o A:
Maintenance  o B: Light Rehabilitation  o C:
Rehabilitation  o D:
identifying factors that contribute to road maintenance policy-making, clustering the network into a set of sub-networks based on these factors, optimizing maintenance policies for each sub-network, and determining the optimal period of the optimal policy, i.e. the frequency of maintenance work.
The key factors selected in this paper spanned three major domains:
Dataset features.
Boxplot of road section length.
pavement condition ratings and road attributes, construction work and types of maintenance interventions, and costs. The availability of these three types of factors, especially the costs, enabled the authors to consider a complete view of budget allocation in policy-making. It was because the framework was able to set the type of future maintenance work for each road segment (based on its functional class and local climate) and the frequency of conducting such work while optimizing the overall budget (at the network level). In this regard, the applicability of several prediction algorithms was examined in the present paper. Each algorithm used a different set of attributes.
Each county in Iran is responsible for maintaining its road network. However, there is no transparent guideline/policy that specifies when and how to maintain roads. Due to a constant lack of budget PBO (2004) has required the counties to follow one of the following general policies: (a) postponing the maintenance until the network condition gets critical and rehabilitation is required, (b) preventive maintenance until the network condition gets critical and rehabilitation is required, and (c) prioritizing and maintaining road sections based on immediate needs. To distribute the limited budget optimally, regardless of what policy is adopted, the maintenance intervention that is applied to a road section is selected based on a financial assessment of different alternatives (PBO, 2011; PBO, 2004). Therefore, the selected intervention may or may not be what the road section actually needs. In the long term, this could result in the deterioration of base and sub-base layers and rapid propagation of cracks on pavements. A problem that could be prevented by well-developed and practical road maintenance policies that impose regular and timely preventive maintenance and light/medium/heavy rehabilitations. In order to make such policies, the developed framework was applied to the case of Iran roads network according to the procedure shown in Fig. 5. The red/blue rectangles specify the steps of the introduced optimization problem. The black rectangles inside red/blue ones show the elements of each step of the optimization problem. These elements are explained in the following sections.
The dataset used in this paper was an assemblage of data, i.e. Comma Separated Values files, from asset management companies across the whole network of Iran. The features of the dataset were road section length (km), road functional class (arterial or local), road section pre- maintenance PCI (PCIe), maintenance year (2015, 2017, or 2018), maintenance cost (million Rials (MR)), province, and maintenance intervention (A: preventive maintenance, B: light rehabilitation, C: medium rehabilitation, or D: heavy rehabilitation). The maintenance intervention feature of the dataset did not have any do-nothing or routine maintenance actions, therefore, it was impossible to study these interventions. Table 2 illustrates the features of the dataset.
Fig. 6-a and -b provide more details on the statistical distribution of the length of road sections. These boxplots have been generated using the BoxPlotR web tool developed by Spitzer, Wildenhain, Rappsilber, and Tyers (2014). Each box plot consists of three main parts: the lower whisker represents the minimum; the central box represents the 25th percentile, the median, and the 75th percentile; and the upper whisker represents the maximum. The + mark in the central box represents the average and the gray interval containing the + mark represents the 95% confidence interval of the average. According to Fig. 6-a, the length of examined road sections for which the PCI values were recorded was in the range of 56.06 m to 517.97 m with a median of 129.14 m and an average of 183.81 m. Fig. 6-b, represents the boxplot of
ExaminedTotal roadroadsectionsectionlengthlength(m()m) ratio in percent. This parameter represents the percentage of road section length for which the PCI was examined. Fig. 6-b could be interpreted similar to Fig. 6-a. In other words, the ratio of ExaminedTotal roadroadsectionsectionlengthlength(m()m) was in the range of 1.13% to 100.00% with a median of 25.98% and an average of 40.18%. The unexamined portions of road sections were in an acceptable condition and did not require any

Warm and Dry
Relatively Warm and Humid
Climate map of Iran (Clean, 2021; Features have been added by the authors.)
A, B, C*, D* B**, C, D
maintenance when inspections were done. For example, assume that
ExaminedTotal roadroadsectionsectionlengthlength(m()m) equals 30% for a road section with a total length of 120 m. This means that 30% × 120m = 36m of the road section needed a maintenance intervention, and therefore, its PCI was examined. The remaining 70% × 120m = 84m was evaluated as acceptable with no need for any maintenance intervention.
The availability of pavement condition and maintenance cost data together is a major problem in most pavement management databases. Even the most advanced pavement management databases, e.g. Long- Term Pavement Performance (LTPP), do not contain a comprehensive record of historical maintenance costs (Infopave, 2021). This problem was basically the main driver of previous scholars who used deterministic cost models. Containing pre-maintenance PCI and maintenance cost of all pavement segments was what made the dataset used in this paper unique. Considering the sensitives about sharing the dataset with the public, any disclosure of the dataset with third parties is subject to written permissions from the provincial asset management companies that own the data. These companies have started to store their data since 2015 on an annual basis, therefore, no former data was accessible to analyze. The provincial databases are supposed to serve pavement maintenance policy-makers to promote sustainable pavement management, plan for future maintenances of the network, estimate required budgets, and keep adequate end-user and technical levels of service.
102 records that had missing features were removed and categorical features namely road functional class, maintenance intervention, and province were encoded using pandas.get_dummies function of Python V.3.
To enhance coherence and modeling accuracy, the road network under study was clustered based on road functional class (A: arterial, L: local) and climate (see Fig. 7, C: relatively warm and humid, W: warm and dry).
The criteria for defining these climate zones were the average annual temperature and the average annual precipitation as shown in Table 3. Obviously, the C climate zone had the lowest temperature and moderate precipitation, the W climate zone had the highest temperature and the lowest precipitation, and the R climate zone had a moderate temperature and the highest precipitation.
The rationale behind this clustering was that policy-makers who have limited budgets may be forced to allocate less funds to local roads as they want to maximize the service to as many people as possible. Furthermore, roads in different climate zones are supposed to be maintained differently as climate is often considered an important contributor to roads deterioration (Piryonesi & El-Diraby, 2018). 3461, 2055, 1154, 502, 7783, and 1505 records belonged to clusters AC, AR, AW, LC, LR, and LW, respectively.
Creating the sample space of policies
In this paper, a policy was generated by assigning one of the applicable maintenance interventions listed in Table 4 to the road
Road condition states and applicable maintenance interventions.
* For long maintenance periods
** For short maintenance periods
Ten-fold cross-validation results.
Algorithm 	Mean, Variance, and Standard Deviation of Accuracy on Testing Set (%)
The Best Neural Network
sections with the corresponding state.
Therefore, the sample space of policies included 4 × 4 × 3 × 2 = 96 policies.
To predict the cost of maintenance policies, each cluster was split into training (75%) and testing sets (25%). Then, a number of supervised machine-learning algorithms that were capable of predicting a quantitative dependent variable namely Gradient Boosting Regression, Lasso, Ridge, Random Forest Regression, Elastic Net, Neural Network, and Multiple Linear Regression algorithms were applied to training sets to develop pilot cost prediction models. As for the Neural Network algorithm, different architectures were designed by changing the number of layers, nodes, and iterations; learning rate; and momentum to find the best architecture. Accuracies of pilot models were improved by Grid Search hyper-parameter tuning. Table 5 shows these algorithms as well as the accuracies of pilot and hyper-parameter-tuned models on training and testing sets. Hyper-parameter-tuned models were validated using the ten-fold cross-validation method the results of which are shown in Table 6. According to this table, the mean accuracy on testing folds was very close to that of the hyper-parameter-tuned models. Additionally, the variance and standard deviation of the accuracies were negligible. Therefore, it was safe to conclude that the hyper-parameter-tuned models were valid. Given that in all clusters the hyper-parameter- tuned Gradient Boosting Regression had the highest accuracy on testing set, i.e. higher than 90% that was enough for this paper, it was used to predict the cost of maintenance interventions.
Studying the impact of maintenance period
The maintenance period indicates whether a maintenance intervention is done in advance, is timely, or is delayed. Therefore, it directly affects the maintenance cost, the maintenance policy, and the network condition. For instance, intuitively, short maintenance periods waste resources and long maintenance periods defer the needed maintenance and impose higher costs due to an excessive network deterioration. However, this important parameter has rarely been studied in the literature. To plug this gap to some extent, this paper examined the effect of short, medium, and long maintenance periods on the maintenance cost, the maintenance policy, and the network condition. The authors selected two-year, four-year, six-year, and twelve-year maintenance periods over a twelve-year decision horizon. Note that the two- year maintenance period represented a short maintenance period (maintenance interventions that are done in advance), the four-year and the six-year maintenance periods represented medium maintenance periods (timely maintenance interventions), and the twelve-year maintenance period represented a long maintenance period (delayed maintenance interventions). Therefore, the gap between the six-year and the twelve-year maintenance periods was intentional and purposeful. Then, all 96 policies were applied in the midpoint of each period, i.e. at the end of years 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11 for the two-year maintenance; years 2, 6, and 10 for the four-year maintenance; years 3 and 9 for the six-year maintenance; and year 6 for the twelve-year maintenance. In each iteration, the post-maintenance PCI of road sections, PCIt, was calculated using the Texas Pavement Performance Prediction model, Eq. (8), (Gharaibeh et al., 2014):
PCIt = 1− e × PCIe	(8)  where ρ is the intervention prolongation factor, β is the intervention slope factor (Gharaibeh et al., 2014, see Table 7), and t is the number of years since the last maintenance intervention. This model was used because no Iranian alternative exists; it has been calibrated for all maintenance interventions, ESAL classes, pavement families, and climates; and it is simple (Gharaibeh et al., 2014; Khiavi & Mohammadi, 2018).
It is noteworthy to mention that post-maintenance PCI of a road section in one iteration served as the pre-maintenance PCI of the same road section in the subsequent iteration. In each iteration, based on pre- maintenance PCI and post-maintenance PCI of road sections, their current and future states were identified. Then, the transition probability matrix of each maintenance intervention was assembled. Since the adopted dataset was huge, the matrices were deemed reliable. Finally, PCINetwork and cost of all policies were calculated using the Markov Chain model, i.e. Eq. (3), and the corresponding Gradient Boosting Regression model respectively. Policies leading to a PCINetwork less than 80.00 were removed to secure a high-quality policy-making.
Finding the optimal policy in each iteration
In each iteration, having the PCINetwork and cost of policies as the policy-making criteria, the non-dominated policies were identified. Then, the optimal policy was found using TOPSIS. The weights of PCINetwork and cost were assumed to be 0.20 and 0.80 respectively after consultation with local experts, i.e. road maintenance policy-makers in sub-networks under study. The cost was assigned a higher weight to prevent selection of extravagant policies.
Selecting the optimal maintenance period
The cash flow diagrams of optimal policies in all maintenance periods and clusters were developed. Furthermore, the unit costs of optimal policies were obtained based on Eq. (9) and were plotted against PCINetwork.

Warm and Dry
Relatively Warm and Humid
Climate Zone 	Pavement Family 	Preventive Maintenance 	Light Rehabilitation 	Medium Rehabilitation 	Heavy Rehabilitation
Thick, intermediate, and overlaid asphalt concrete pavements (thicker than 2.5 in.); Thin and thin-surfaced asphalt concrete pavements (thinner than 2.5
Fig. 8 shows the cash flow diagrams of optimal policies. It contains six sub-graphs, i.e. Fig. 8-a to -f, that respectively represent clusters AC, LC, AR, LR, AW, and LW. One could see four horizontal lines in each sub- graph. Each horizontal line represents the twelve-year decision horizon as well as the occurrence of maintenance incidents in a certain maintenance period. It starts with the two-year maintenance period at the bottom, the four-year maintenance period above the two-year maintenance period, the six-year maintenance period above the four-year maintenance period, and the twelve-year maintenance period above the six-year maintenance period, i.e. at the top. Each maintenance period is illustrated with a certain color. In other words, the two-year, four-year, six-year, and twelve-year maintenance periods are represented by purple, green, cyan, and red. Over each horizontal line, the perpendicular downward arrow(s) could be seen that represent the maintenance incidents. Maintenance incidents occurred in the midpoint of each interval, i.e. at the end of years 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11 for the two- year maintenance period; years 2, 6, and 10 for the four-year maintenance period; years 3 and 9 for the six-year maintenance period; and year 6 for the twelve-year maintenance period. According to the legend on the top left corner of Fig. 8-a, every downward arrow is annotated with three pieces of information: (1) the corresponding optimal policy at the top, (2) the policy cost (MR) in the middle, and (3) PCINetwork at the bottom. Note that each arrow’s size is proportionate to the policy cost. In each sub-graph, policies’ cost was predicted using the hyper-parameter tuned Gradient Boosting Regression that was coded with the Python programming language in the Jupyter Notebook. PCINetwork was obtained using the Markov Chain model. Having the cost of policies and PCINetwork as the policy-making criteria, the non-dominated policies were identified. Then, the optimal policy was found using TOPSIS. The weights of PCINetwork and cost were assumed to be 0.20 and 0.80 respectively after consultation with local experts. Both the Markov Chain model and TOPSIS were modeled in the Microsoft Excel.
To further clarify what Fig. 8 presents, Fig. 8-a is elaborated in detail. The rest of the sub-graphs, i.e. Fig. 8-b to -f, could be elaborated similarly. At the top of Fig. 8-a, there is only one maintenance incident. This incident is colored in red; corresponds to the twelve-year maintenance period; happens at the end of year 6; and is annotated with policy CDDD, cost of1.32 × 108 × r6 MR where r = 1+ inflation rate, and PCINetwork of 84.51. This means conducting interventions C, D, D, and D for road sections that at the start of the period were respectively in good, satisfactory, fair, and unacceptable states. This incident would cost1.32 × 108 × r6 MR where r = 1+ inflation rate. A constant inflation rate was assumed over the decision horizon. Once the maintenance incident took place, the cluster PCINetwork would be 84.51. Other cash flow diagrams of Fig. 8-a that correspond to the six-year, four-year, and two-year maintenance periods could be interpreted similarly.
Fig. 8 in its current format could not be used for identifying the optimal maintenance policies and periods in each cluster. Therefore, additional computations were needed to make it interpretable. To this end, Eqs. (8–9) were applied to convert Fig. 8 to scatter plots shown in Fig. 9. The following paragraphs explain how Fig. 8 was transformed into Fig. 9, and how this transformation facilitated achieving the main research goals, i.e. identifying optimal maintenance policies and periods as well as the potential impacts of climate and road functional class on them.
According to the cash flow diagrams in Fig. 8 and based on Eqs. (8–9), the scatter plots shown in Fig. 9 were drawn. Fig. 9 contains six sub-graphs, i.e. Fig. 9-a to -f, that respectively represent clusters AC, LC, AR, LR, AW, and LW. Each sub-graph demonstrates the following information for its corresponding cluster: (1) the unit cost of the optimal policy against the resultant PCINetwork, (2) the optimal policy, (3) the maintenance period, and (4) the post-maintenance PCI range in the last iteration. To clarify how these sub-graphs were generated, the procedure of generating Fig. 9-a is explained in the following paragraph. This procedure could be applied to the rest of the sub-graphs, i.e. Fig. 9-b to -f, as well.
Fig. 9-a is basically a transformed version of Fig. 8-a. Indeed, Fig. 9-a is a scatter plot that consists of four colored data-points. Each data-point in Fig. 9-a corresponds to the cash flow diagram in Fig. 8-a that has the same color. For example, the red data-point in Fig. 9-a corresponds to the red cash flow diagram in Fig. 8-a. This red cash flow diagram in Fig. 8-a represents the twelve-year maintenance period that is annotated with policy CDDD. The PCINetwork of this policy is 84.51 (the horizontal axis of Fig. 9-a) and its total cost is1.32× 108 × r6 MRwherer = 1+ inflation rate. This total cost could be converted to unit cost (the vertical axis of Fig. 9-a) based on Eq. (9). The post-maintenance PCI range in the last iteration (based on Eq. (8)) is also provided. This procedure could be applied to the rest of the sub-graphs, i.e. Fig. 9-b to Fig. 9-f, as well.
The main purpose of drawing Fig. 9 was two-fold: (1) determining whether climate, road functional class, and maintenance period mattered to road maintenance policy-making, and (2) identifying the most optimal maintenance policy and period. The following paragraph elaborates how Fig. 9 was interpreted to select the most optimal policy and period in clusters AC, LC, AR, LR, AW, and LW.
To interpret Fig. 9, one could start by comparing the extremums of the horizontal and vertical axes of Fig. 9-a to Fig. 9-f. That is, detecting the maintenance periods that resulted in the highest and the lowest
PCINetwork and unit maintenance cost in clusters AC, LC, AR, LR, AW, and LW. To this end, the following questions needed to be answered:
Optimal policies and the complementary information in all clusters.
▪ Question 1: Which maintenance period resulted in the highest PCINetwork in clusters AC, LC, AR, LR, AW, and LW? ▪ Question 2: Which maintenance period resulted in the lowest PCINetwork in clusters AC, LC, AR, LR, AW, and LW?
▪ Question 3: Which maintenance period resulted in the highest unit maintenance cost in clusters AC, LC, AR, LR, AW, and LW?
▪ Question 4: Which maintenance period resulted in the lowest unit maintenance cost in clusters AC, LC, AR, LR, AW, and LW?
Regarding question (1), a comparison of PCINetwork of maintenance periods in clusters AC, LC, AR, LR, AW, and LW reveals that in all clusters, the two-year maintenance period resulted in the highest PCINetwork. A similar approach could be taken to answer questions (2–4). For example, regarding question (2), one could conclude that in LC, AR, LR, and AW clusters the twelve-year maintenance period led to the lowest PCINetwork as opposed to AC and LW clusters where the six-year maintenance period did. Regarding question (3), the twelve-year maintenance period was the most expensive in all clusters, except for AR and LW clusters, where the two-year maintenance period was. Finally, regarding question (4), it was also found that in all clusters the four-year maintenance period was the cheapest.
Unit cost of optimal policies against PCINetwork in all clusters.
Another aspect that could be considered while interpreting Fig. 9, is the intensity of the maintenance policies. The intensity of policies could be analyzed from the perspective of climate, road functional class, and maintenance period. As for the climate, roads in zone W demanded the most intense maintenance policies, followed by those in zones C and R respectively. The same applied to arterial roads followed by local ones, i.
e. arterial roads demanded more intense maintenance policies than local roads. As for the maintenance period, the shorter the maintenance period the better was the post-maintenance PCI range for road sections and the less intense was the optimal policy. In other words, most of the two-year optimal policies were a combination of A: preventive maintenance, B: light rehabilitation, and C: medium rehabilitation whereas most of the twelve-year optimal policies were a combination of C: medium rehabilitation and D: heavy rehabilitation. This finding indicated that road functional class, climate, and maintenance period mattered to road maintenance policy-making. Finally, considering their acceptable PCINetwork and low cost, the four-year optimal policies were recommended to be implemented (as the most optimal maintenance policies). 6.
To evaluate the applicability and value of the proposed framework, a semi-structured questionnaire survey of pavement management experts was carried out. The questionnaire included 14 statements that were to be rated based on a five-point Likert scale. The statements addressed three main issues: (1) the link between the proposed framework and sustainability management, (2) the applicability of the framework, and (3) an assessment of the results of the case study. An open-ended question at the end allowed the respondents to provide their comments, suggestions, and overall assessment. Once the first draft of the questionnaire was designed, three experts were invited to comment on its structure through a pilot run. The questionnaire was revised based on their input. The final questionnaire is shown in Fig. 10.
Respondents were selected based on their background, work experience, and expertise. The respondent selection criteria included familiarity with pavement maintenance policy-making, sustainable asset management, operations research (particularly optimization), machine learning, the Markov Chain model, and multi-criteria decision-making. 19 potential Iranian respondents were identified and contacted eight of whom gave their consent to participate. The paper was shared with these eight respondents. They were asked to kindly read the paper before filling in the questionnaire. They were also requested to contact the authors in case of any ambiguities in the paper or the questionnaire. All eight respondents had a Ph.D. in civil and environmental engineering. Their years of experience ranged from 2 to 46 with an average of 25. Table 8 provides more details on the respondents’ background and expertise.
Supposedly, these respondents significantly contribute to the road maintenance policy-making in Iran and provide value for the evaluation of this research for the following two reasons:
▪ Except for one respondent, all are decision-makers in Iranian road maintenance agencies. In other words, they are policy- makers at Iran Road Maintenance and Transportation Organization or Plan and Budget Organization of Iran.
The respondents’ background and expertise.

Computational intelligence in pavement design, maintenance policy-making, and performance evaluation
Network-level data collection and analysis for pavement performance/condition modeling
Computational data analysis, particularly image and video processing, in pavement maintenance policy-making
Asphalt materials, pavement instrumentation, and pavement performance modeling
Construction and Project Management
Road construction and maintenance planning, methods, and equipment
Transportation Engineering
Transportation safety, traffic engineering, and highway maintenance policy-making
Data analytics in asset management with particular additional expertise in pavement management and climate policy
▪ They also serve key roles in road maintenance projects awarded by the Ministry of Roads of Iran and/or developing Iranian road maintenance codes, e.g. PBO (2004, 2011).
Fig. 11 shows the results of the survey. According to the adopted five- point scale in the questionnaire, it could be concluded that the respondents were in favor of a statement if the corresponding μ(the mean value of responses to a statement) ≥ 4 (Harpe, 2015; Mahpour & Mortaheb, 2018; Wang & Krosnick, 2020). This was the case for all statements. At the same time, the standard deviations of all statements were below 1. This meant a dispersion below 15 × 100% = 20% around the mean that was acceptable for this research. Furthermore, the modes of the responses to all statements were either 4 or 5. Therefore, one could conclude that based on the experts’ responses (in the open-ended part of the survey), the developed framework is applicable to real-world road networks. They noted that it streamlines maintenance policy- making by clustering a network into similar sub-networks, and formalizes policy-making through the use of an objective optimization model. They also noted that the proposed framework is customizable and is independent of the location of the network. The main contribution of such a framework is promoting active rather than passive maintenance policies, enabling the study of sustained maintenance budget allocation, and enhancing communications with policy-makers.
The experts also commented positively on the suitability of the selected optimization criteria, and the need for using the Texas Pavement Performance Prediction model, given the lack of a pavement performance prediction model in Iran. They also noted that the TOPSIS approach was helpful in clarifying the rationale for optimization. Finally, the experts noted that the results of the case study match some of their best practices (in terms of a stable frequency in maintenance).
Comparison of modeling tools and results with previous studies
The comparison of modeling tools and results with previous studies could be based on three aspects. First, the quantification of costs. In the present paper, the cost of maintenance policies was quantified using machine-learning algorithms. These algorithms used real cost data to predict the cost of maintenance policies based on road section length, road functional class, climate, and pre-maintenance PCI (see Figs. 8 and 9). The authors believe this approach is far closer to reality than previous deterministic cost models. Indeed, previous deterministic cost models did not consider any of road functional class, climate, or pre- maintenance PCI and suggested constant unit costs for maintenance interventions. For example, Khiavi & Mohammadi, 2018 suggested the deterministic unit costs of 59249 Rialm2 , 147794 Rialm2 , 242344 Rialm2 , and
Results of the conducted questionnaire survey.
308100 Rialm2 respectively for preventive maintenance, light rehabilitation, medium rehabilitation, and heavy rehabilitation. These deterministic unit costs should be applied to all road sections regardless of their functional class, climate, or pre-maintenance condition. Second, the quantification of condition. The conditions of roads were assessed using the Markov Chain model which is a probabilistic method. Although deterministic ones are even more widely-employed, probabilistic models could incorporate uncertainty in pavement performance, which is closer to reality. Note that the accuracy of the adopted machine-learning algorithms or the Markov Chain model cannot be compared with their deterministic peers. The reason is that these deterministic models do not predict unique outputs for different road segments, and therefore, no statistical accuracy measure could be defined for them. Third, the optimal policy selection tool. TOPSIS has several inherent superiorities over other multi-criteria decision-making tools. The most obvious one is that some multi-criteria decision-making tools, e.g. the weighting sum method, have shortcomings when the Pareto curve is concave. In that case, the solutions cannot be identified.
TOPSIS is also a proper tool for critical and complex problems as no limitation exists on its application, generates the same preference order of solutions even if a new criterion or alternative is introduced, does not result in a null weight, is agile and suitable for group decision-making problems, reduces vagueness and uncertainty, and allows the combination of quantitative and qualitative criteria (Papathanasiou & Ploskas, 2018).
The afore-mentioned superiorities of machine-learning algorithms, the Markov Chain model, and TOPSIS make the adopted methodology generalizable to other road-maintenance policy-making contexts as well. The adopted methodology also contributes to sustainable development goals #9 (by facilitating budget allocation and enhancing policy-makers communication with authorities), #11 (by maintaining adequate technical and end-user levels of service and enhancing policy- makers communication with authorities), and #13 (by enabling climate change adaptation for roads).

An important gap that existed in the road maintenance policy- making realm was that the previous studies mostly focused on the single-period policy-making. However, a policy that could be repeatedly implemented creates consistent and stable maintenance horizons. Another important gap was the lack of stochastic maintenance cost quantification. Although almost all studies in the field included maintenance cost as a contributing criterion, due to a lack of actual historical cost data, most cost prediction models were deterministic. Additionally, the maintenance period was rarely included in the road maintenance policy-making researches.
To plug these gaps, a practical framework was proposed in this paper to find the optimal maintenance policies in a road network. The framework included four steps: (1) identifying the major factors that contribute to the road maintenance policy-making, (2) clustering the road network based on the contributing factors, (3) identifying criteria that factor into optimal policies, and (4) determining the optimal policies and periods using the optimization techniques and based on the identified criteria. To test the applicability of the framework, it was applied to the case of Iran roads network step-by-step. In the first step, road functional class and climate were identified as the major factors that contribute to the maintenance policy-making. In the second step, the whole network was clustered based on two road functional classes (A: arterial, L: local) and three climate zones (C: relatively warm and humid, W: warm and dry). In the third step, the maintenance cost, the network condition, and the maintenance period were identified as the criteria that factor into optimal policies. In the fourth step, 96 maintenance policies were defined and applied to each sub-network. To this end, two-year, four-year, six-year, and twelve-year maintenance periods were examined over a twelve-year decision horizon. To quantify the cost of maintenance policies, seven machine-learning algorithms including Gradient Boosting Regression, Lasso, Ridge, Random Forest Regression, Elastic Net, Neural Network, and Multiple Linear Regression were adopted to develop pilot cost prediction models. Then, the grid search method was used to tune the hyper-parameters of the pilot models. The hyper-parameter-tuned models were validated by the ten- fold cross-validation method. In all sub-networks, using the coefficient of determination (R2) as the evaluation metric, it was found that the mean accuracy on testing folds of all algorithms was very close to that of the hyper-parameter-tuned models. Additionally, the variance and standard deviation of the accuracies were negligible. Therefore, it was safe to conclude that the hyper-parameter-tuned models were valid. Given that in all clusters the hyper-parameter-tuned Gradient Boosting Regression had the highest accuracy on the testing set, i.e. higher than 90%, it was recommended in this paper. The same accuracy for other algorithms was between 50% and 90%. Sub-networks condition was modeled using the Markov Chain model. The road performance was measured by the average Pavement Condition Index (PCI) of the whole sub-network. Having policies cost and sub-networks PCI, the optimal policy was selected using the Technique for Order of Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution (TOPSIS). To evaluate the value of the proposed framework, road maintenance experts were surveyed who confirmed the applicability of the framework and the adopted methodology.
Summary of main findings
It was concluded that the Gradient Boosting Regression was an accurate machine-learning algorithm to predict the cost of maintenance policies. The grid search and the ten-fold cross-validation methods were demonstrated to be efficient in tuning the hyper-parameters and validating the machine-learning algorithms. Furthermore, the case study revealed that: (1) the road functional class and climate mattered to road maintenance policy-making, and (2) the framework facilitated achieving sustainable development goals #9, #11, and #13. Last but not least, in all sub-networks, the four-year maintenance period was optimal. Roads in the warm zone demanded the most intense policies, followed by those in the cold and humid zones. The same applied to arterial roads followed by local ones.
In short, this paper contributed to the road maintenance policy- making global community by:
▪ Highlighting the superiority of machine-learning algorithms over deterministic cost models: road maintenance cost data is rarely available. The previous studies usually relied on deterministic cost models, e.g. unit cost or cost per unit length of the maintained road. Although this stems from the lack of actual data, it is a major shortcoming of previous researches. In other words, the budget limit is of paramount importance in allocating funds to maintenance projects, and estimating the cost of such projects using deterministic models is not the most accurate/reliable way. The developed machine-learning algorithm, i.e. the Gradient Boosting Regression model, detects the patterns in costs of previous records by considering all the inputted independent variables, e.g. road section length, pre- maintenance PCI, maintenance policy, road functional class, climate, and maintenance period. Therefore, it is more accurate/reliable than simplistic and deterministic models that consider only road length and probably a few other variables.  ▪ Demonstrating the effectiveness of clustering road networks: the case study showed that different clusters of roads need different maintenance policies. This finding demonstrates the value of the framework and proves its applicability in terms of suggesting network-specific maintenance policies. This happened owing to more accurate policy cost estimation and network-level post-maintenance prediction.
▪ Proposing a framework to replace the passive road maintenance with perpetual policies, enable the study of sustained maintenance budget allocation, and enhance communications with policy-makers: knowing the required budget and network- level post-maintenance PCI, PCINetwork, increases the confidence level in communicating with road maintenance agencies in terms of financial needs, future maintenance policies, future conditions of roads, etc. This helps road agencies plan with more extensive knowledge and clearer visions.
All in all, the paper had the following limitations:
▪ To facilitate the calculations, seven road states suggested in ASTM D6433-18 were reduced to four.
▪ The maintenance intervention feature of the dataset did not have any do-nothing or routine maintenance actions, therefore, it was impossible to study these interventions.
▪ Pavement structure (pavement layers, layers’ materials, and layers’ thicknesses) has been identified as a pavement performance factor (Abdelaziz, El-Hakim, El-Badawy, & Afify, 2020; P´erez-Acebo, Gonzalo-Orden, Findley, & Rojí, 2021). It is mainly because, everything else being equal, the thicker the layer, the older it will require a maintenance intervention. However, pavement structure was not adopted as a possible factor in this paper. The main reason was that the complete information of pavement structure was not available. It is to be mentioned that many performance models have included pavement structure as shown in the list of pavement deterioration models provided by P´erez-Acebo et al., 2021 and Abdelaziz et al., 2020.
▪ The framework was based on optimizing cost and PCINetwork. To make sure that the criteria were met properly, a threshold of
80.00 was set for PCINetwork in all clusters. To control cost, it was assigned a higher weight in the TOPSIS method rather than placing a budget limit on policies. The reason was that no information was available on financial restrictions in the adopted maintenance periods.
▪ A constant inflation rate was assumed over the decision horizon. However, in developing countries including Iran, unstable economic situations as well as the subsequent uncertainty over future inflation rates could affect road maintenance costs and policies. This, in turn, would potentially add more ambiguities and complexities to the road maintenance projects and, hence, would affect the accuracy and applicability of the tools, methods, and models examined in this paper.
▪ To model the short; and long maintenance periods, the authors respectively examined the two-year; four-year and six-year; and twelve-year maintenance periods over a twelve- year decision horizon.
▪ The basis for selecting the optimal policies were the Texas Pavement Performance Prediction model and the TOPSIS method. Using other tools may result in different results.
▪ Roads were assessed based on PCI. Although it was because no other relevant feature, e.g. Present Serviceability Index or Structural Condition Index, was available in the dataset, two important concerns need to be discussed: o PCI represents road surface layer condition. It is expected that road sub-layers deteriorate if a road agency solely maintains the surface layer, i.e. if the agency perpetually uses a policy of preventive maintenance/light rehabilitation. To address this concern, a condition was imposed on the selection of optimal policies according to Table 4: A road section with a current state of unacceptable, i.e. state 4, had to undergo a medium/heavy rehabilitation. Other road sections, i. e. states 1–3, could also undergo those interventions.  o High road-user level of service is an important concern of road agencies. PCI is not necessarily a measure of the road- user level of service. Clustering roads based on the functional class was one way to indirectly incorporate the road- user level of service into the selection of optimal policies. Arterial roads serve more people. Any enhancement to their condition increases ride quality which in turn makes road- users more satisfied. Furthermore, traffic interruption due to road maintenance is a major factor in defining the road- user level of service. It was indirectly considered in the paper. At one end, i.e. the two-year maintenance period, there would be frequent but less intense maintenances. At the other end, i.e. the twelve-year maintenance period, there would be less frequent maintenances, but they would have significant impacts when they take place. Luckily, the optimal maintenance periods were in-between.
o All in all, given the importance of traffic volume on technical and road-user levels of service, it makes sense that the agency takes a more aggressive policy with arterial roads and a more relaxed policy with local ones. Road agencies should be expected to achieve unit costs that correspond to their climate zone and the proportion of arterial roads in their jurisdictions.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Amirreza Mahpour: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal Analysis, Investigation, Data Curation, Writing – Original Draft, Writing – Review & Editing, Visualization. Tamer El- Diraby: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Writing – Review & Editing, Supervision.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
