Construction and Building Materials 306 (2021) 124905
Climate change impact on infrastructure: A machine learning solution for predicting pavement condition index
Department of Civil & Mineral Engineering, University of Toronto, Canada
A R T I C L E I N F O  	A B S T R A C T
Climate change
Pavement condition index Data analytics
A decision-support tool was developed to predict the condition of asphalt roads in 2, 3, 5 and 6 years. The tool was developed based on analyzing a large dataset (more than 3000 road sections) extracted from the Long-Term Pavement Performance (LTPP) database. Several algorithms were examined: two decision trees, k-nearest neighbors (k-NN), naïve Bayes classifier, naïve Bayes coupled with kernel estimator, random forest and gradient boosted trees. The last three achieved the highest accuracy levels (above 90%). The attributes used were intentionally selected to be related to climate stressors (such as temperature ranges, perspiration and freeze–thaw cycles) or basic road attributes (such as age and functional class) to enable the models quantify the impact of climate change. A major caveat of this study is that some climate stressors such as storm frequency and severity were not included in the model as there was no data available about them in the LTPP dataset. With the proposed tool, the impacts of different climate scenarios can be examined by running the model with inputs that reflect the attributes of each scenario. To illustrate this, we examined the deterioration of two sets of roads: one from Ontario and one from Texas. Each set was examined in two climate scenarios. The analysis showed lower levels of deterioration for the Ontario roads and exacerbation of deterioration for the roads in Texas. It means that climate change may exacerbate or alleviate road deterioration depending on location. This type of analysis can be beneficial to the long-term policymaking in road infrastructure. For example, notwithstanding the impact of climate attributes that are not considered in this study, an Ontario policymaker should expect that with the same design standards and the same maintenance regimes, the service levels of roads will be enhanced.
Introduction
Public decisionmakers are aware of the potential impacts of climate change on civil infrastructure. There is, however, limited number of tools to help them quantify these impacts [54]. In this work, machine learning was used in order to help study the impact of changes to several climate attributes (such as temperature and precipitation) on asphalt pavements deterioration. First, an algorithm was trained to predict the deterioration of roads. We used the Long-Term Pavement Performance (LTPP) dataset, which is administered by the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) in the USA [31]. The dataset reports road conditions, for example, cracks, potholes and surface roughness. It also includes data about climatic attributes. Traditionally, research in the domain of pavement deterioration has used mechanistic attributes to study deterioration— for example, deflection and the type, size and severity of distresses. This work, instead, used affordable attributes (such as climatic data) as the main input. In other words, patterns in climate attributes were associated with pavement deterioration rates. The deterioration rate is expressed in terms of a combined condition index called Pavement Condition Index (PCI). The trained algorithms take climate data and initial PCI values as input and predict reduced PCI values in 2 to 6 years. Table 1 shows the list of attributes used as input to the algorithm. Second, the deterioration of two sets of roads (one in Ontario and one in Texas) was examined under two climate scenarios: current climate and a climate change scenario (RCP8.5) in 2098. The paper investigates how much more (or less) the PCI will deteriorate in these two regions if climate attributes change. This research addresses a few gaps in the literature including the scarcity of studies on PCI prediction using LTPP data and studies on the effect of multiple climate stressors.
* Corresponding author.
Received 15 November 2020; Received in revised form 6 September 2021; Accepted 10 September 2021
Before delving into the methodology, analysis and findings, it is important to list the limitations of this study. First, this study models deterioration in the short term. The algorithms were trained to estimate Table 1
Predictive attributes and their description.
The initial PCI value
FREEZE_INDEX_YR
Freeze index for year (in Celsius days)
Average of daily maximum air temperatures for year
Average of daily minimum air temperatures for year

FREEZE_THAW_YR
Number of freeze–thaw cycles per year
OVERLAY_THICKNESS
Thickness of the placed layer in rehabilitation
Average annual daily traffic

Type of last remedial action
Number of years since the last remedial action
Number of conducted remedial actions
The class of PCI after three years (as
categorized by the ASTM)
22%, Satisfactory:
the decline in PCI over 2, 3, 5 and 6 years under no maintenance. The reason behind choosing this horizon is that if a road is left without maintenance for more than 6 years, it will deteriorate drastically. In North American standards, such a road will be deemed impassible, or at least be prioritized for maintenance. In fact, it is typical that municipalities and DOTs (Departments of Transportation) always conduct a sort of maintenance within any 6-year window. Of course, other jurisdictions may have different maintenance policies. In short, in our study, we limited the prediction to 6 years to match the practices of DOTs and the patterns in the used dataset.
The second key limitation is about climatic attributes. Several changes in climatic attributes can contribute to the deterioration patterns of roads. However, in this study, we only investigated the impact of changes in a subset of these variables. Table 1 shows the attributes used as input to the algorithms, which are the most well-known attributes according to the literature of pavement performance modeling. It is possible that attributes such as changes in severity of storms or floods or long periods of dry weather may also have impacts on the pavement. However, attributes such as these are not tracked in the LTPP. Furthermore, while all climatic attributes of Table 1 were used in climate change analyses, the confidence in projecting some of these climatic attributes, such as temperature and precipitation, is higher.
Finally, only two snapshots were considered for prediction. Roads deteriorate with time and based on several attributes—for example, pavement type, usage levels (traffic counts) and levels and frequency of maintenance. Assuming all other attributes stay the same, the change in climate will alter deterioration, i.e., climate change will change the slope of deterioration curves, or in our case, the speed by which PCI changes. This impact will take place gradually and over an extended period of time. In the most reasonable assessments, the net impacts of climate change will be, on average, unnoticeable in a window of 6 years in the life of a pavement. In other words, it is not meaningful to study the delta in PCI deterioration, caused by climate change, over 6 years. Also, it is not practical to predict deterioration over long periods of time (e.g., 20 or 30 years), because, at least in North America, the road will have had undergone several maintenance actions in this period. So, we decided to study two snapshots. How does the delta (associated with climate change) in road deterioration vary under two significantly different climate scenarios? We studied the delta deterioration of roads in 2018 and 2098. In other words, we compared the deterioration rates of pavements in 2018 and 2098 under two climate scenarios. More precisely, starting with a sample set of roads in 2018, how much do they deteriorate in 2, 3, 5, 6 years; and if the same set of roads existed in 2098, how would they behave in 2, 3, 5, 6 years. Year 2098 was selected because this is where the change in attributes (particularly temperature) will be significant enough. Of course, other intervals could be studied as well.
In short, assuming a set of roads with certain conditions/attributes existed in the climate of 2018 and that of 2098, how will their deterioration be different? Furthermore, we examined two sets of road sections (one from Ontario and one from Texas) in two snapshots. This was important to help capture the impact of climate zone on the delta in deterioration. In both cases, we used the current climate and the changes caused by a hypothetical climate change scenario within the range of RCP8.5.
Despite the limitations of the two snapshots, the value of this study stems from the following arguments:
The main question in climate change action is how the policies will change. The results presented here is not meant to help an engineer at a DOT decide how to hasten or change maintenance schemes over the next 2–6 years; or to estimate the net increase in costs (over the same period) associated with climate change. Rather, how policymakers should change the long-term policies for road management. Of particular importance is to start thinking about how the design standards and finance of roads should change.
This study presents a benchmark and an approach to help study changes in climate attributes other than the ones listed in Table 1. For example, to overcome the limitations of data availability, scenarios about precipitation levels, or changes in freeze cycles can be generated. Each can be examined using the proposed algorithm. Of course, for those who want to study the impacts of climate change over shorter periods, they can benefit from prorating the results of this study (Of course, assuming nonlinearity).
This is the first work that uses machine learning algorithms to quantify the impact of climate change on the PCI of asphalt pavement. With an exception of a few studies [35,55,57], research on using machine learning for PCI prediction are almost rare because of the data-intensive nature of this performance indicator, which requires a great amount of data preparation. Moreover, studying the effect of multiple climate stressors simultaneously is another feature unique to this study. The handful of previously available studies limited their domain to one or two climate stressors, mostly temperature and precipitation.
The purpose of this paper is to create a decision-support tool to predict the deterioration of asphalt roads under different values of climate stressors. This study has two major facets: first, predicting road condition using predictive machine learning models, second, their implementation in a web-based platform. The online portal is coupled with a map. Thus, users can query different roads and learn about their future condition under different ranges of climatic stressors and traffic. Such tools can be highly useful to transportation agencies and decisionmakers in different levels of government.

Size of training data
Climate change impact?
DC, Nonlinear regression

Nonlinear regression
Smith and Tighe [70]
M− E, Linear regression
M− E, Linear regression
LTPP and New Mexico DOT
Nonlinear regression, survival curves
Bayesian regression with neural networks
M− E, Linear regression
Guo and Timm [26]
DC, Nonlinear regression
IRI and rutting
ANN & Group method of data handling (GMDH)
less than100
E, linear & nonlinear regression
less than 100

M− E, Linear regression
Archilla and Madanat  [4]

DC, linear & nonlinear regression
Linear regression
Strategic Highway Research Program Netherlands (SHRP-NL)
Linear & nonlinear regression,
Linear regression
UK Highways Agency (Area 6)
M− E nonlinear regression

Decision tree
RCI and SDI
M− E, Linear regression
ANN & Nonlinear regression
DC, Nonlinear regression
Assumptions based on experimental studies
Chinowsky et al., [13]
Dutch road network
ME, Assumptions based on experimental studies
Background and related work
Table 2 summarizes the past research on pavement condition prediction. This table shows that empirical and mechanistic-empirical (M− E) methods, which are based on regression, are among the most common approaches. An important limitation of these models is their deterministic nature, which does not allow for conducting probabilistic risk analysis and considering the stochastic nature of climate change [21,66,67,79].
Some researchers have used probabilistic methods, such as Markov chain, to study deterioration. Crude Markov models disregard maintenance history and do not consider the impact of time [3,19,46,60,79]. Semi-Markov models have been used to address these issues [7]. They, however, are usually more data intensive in comparison to time- homogeneous Markov models. Acquiring longitudinal data for their training requires regular field-based surveys, which are not feasible to many small municipalities [12,59].
For long, research in the use of machine learning in predicting deterioration has focused on the use of neural networks
An overview of different modules of the current work.
[20,21,35,40,45,74]. While these models help to predict deterioration, their black-box nature does not provide decisionmakers with enough interpretable insights. To address the interpretability issue, recently researchers have used other algorithms, such as decision trees and random forests [12,24,57,59,77]. It is important to note that most studies conducted based on the LTPP data tend to use the IRI rather than the PCI [10,24,28,33,40]. Only two recent studies [35,57] have used machine learning for predicting the PCI. This could be because LTPP data does not track PCI, and its calculation requires a large amount of data preparation [11,57]. Another important fact in Table 2 is the small size of the training set used in past studies, which result in overfit or overparameterized models.
Recently, substantial research work has been directed at climate change adaptation and mitigation with emphasis on infrastructure [5,73,84]. The impact of climate change on many issues, such as floods and hydrological infrastructure, is studied as well [47,48], but limited studies are available on road infrastructures [42,53]. The handful of available studies are based on making assumptions about the ranges of impacts (without calculating them). For example, Chinowsky et al., [13] calculated the cost of different types of climate change adaptation scenarios on roads in the US. They did not model the impact of climate stressors on deterioration mathematically. For instance, they assumed that “rut depth over a road’s lifecycle increases by approximately 3 mm with every 10 cm increase in mean monthly rainfall.” For climate change scenarios, they relied on Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES), because at the time the Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) was not yet released by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). In the same vein, Schweikert et al., [68] developed a software for analyzing the impact of climate change on road infrastructure and development. Their study used quantitative and qualitative methods to quantify the risks and consequences of climate change in the policy level. Neumann et al., [49] estimated the cost that climate change imposes on the US infrastructure until the end of 21st century. Their study included roads, bridges, coastal development and urban drainage.
Some studies have attempted to include climate attributes in deterioration modeling. Most of these uses a M− E models [6]. For example, AASHTO [1] developed one for predicting IRI based on LTPP data. However, its R2 is only 0.56 and does not address climate change explicitly. Anyala et al., [3] investigated the impact of different climatic scenarios on asphalt pavement rut progression. They combined M− E models with simulation to create deterioration models for different climate scenarios. Ayed [6] also considered the impact of climate change in developing M− E models for predicting the condition of roads in Canada. The PIs used in that study included riding comfort index (RCI) and the surface distress index (SDI). Recently, efforts have been made to use Markov models in assessing the impact of climate on roads. However, deterioration models developed based on Markov chain cannot incorporate traffic and climate as explicit variables [3,57].
Materials and methods
It is difficult to develop a single model to study the impacts of climate change on PCI deterioration. This study, then, focused on addressing one aspect of that: how the change in the selected climate stressors can affect deterioration. The study used LTPP data to achieve two major objectives:
Developing a machine learning model for predicting PCI deterioration in the near future. We examined and compared the accuracy of several algorithms to do the prediction. One key feature in this model is that it does not use a merely mechanistic mentality. The model developed is entirely dependent on data analytics, without any causal assumptions. Furthermore, the model intentionally did not rely on mechanistic attributes only and incorporated empirical attributes as well. The data that was considered is mainly related to climate attributes and basic information about the road, as shown in Table 1. These attributes are available to most municipalities and DOTs for free or at a minim cost [57].
Examine the impact of changes in some climate attributes on the deterioration rates. Future studies can benchmark the proposed approach to study other attributes. However, data availability is an issue. We examined the deterioration over a short time horizon (2–6 years) in two different years: 2018 and 2098. Data for two sets of roads was analyzed.
The size of dataset used in this model is the largest so far, and it is an open-box model. Previous models were developed using ANNs. Because they were trained based on small datasets, they mostly resulted in overparameterized or overfitted models. This reduces the models’ accuracy when applied to unseen data. This research was developed based on a training set that included more than 3000 examples. Using such large number of cleaned data points resulted not only in a higher accuracy but also a more reliable model.
Different dimensions of analysis.
The model has been programmed into a web-based portal for predicting the deterioration of roads. As shown in Fig. 1, users can select a road from a map by querying its name or location and enter some values for its current attributes. Each input for climate stressors could be a single value or a range of possible values. The model will iterate through the values of input variables and provide different results for each input. The future PCI is predicted for two, three, five and six years. The resulting PCI is visually represented on the map. As shown in Fig. 1, the classes of the PCI are according to ASTM D 6433–07 guidelines [78] with a minor change of labeling all values below 40 as Very Poor. This is because in practice roads in this category are usually considered impassible [8,53].
The main tasks of our work are shown in Fig. 2. First, ASTM curves were digitized, and their formulae were extracted. Next, the formulae were imbedded in a computer program to calculate the PCI for each road automatically. In the next step the other attributes were retrieved from the database using SQL and collated with PCI values. The features of Table 1 were chosen after surveying 58 municipalities in Ontario and studying their asset management plans (AMPs) to learn about their data availabilities. Furthermore, the databases of 10 small municipalities in
The size of training dataset for each prediction horizon.
Prediction horizon (Yr)
Number of examples in training set
Ontario were studied to confirm the information, and the opinions of several municipal experts were considered during feature selection. Careful consideration was given to choosing those attributes that are either free or affordable. Another important consideration was the relation to climate change impacts, which was affirmed by studying the literature [1,13,14,36,39,49,64,76] and soliciting expert opinion. The inputs of Transportation Association of Canada (TAC) was also taken into consideration especially in calculation the GBE [27]. After the data was prepared, several machine learning algorithms were trained, and their accuracy was evaluated. Next, the values of climate stressors were calculated for two climate scenarios: current climate in 2018 and RCP8.5 in 2098. The input variables for the latter was calculated based on the method proposed by Deng et al., [17] and the recommendations of IPCC [32].
Other than climate change analysis, the analysis in this research has a few other facets. The different dimensions of analysis are shown in Fig. 3. The first area of interest is the comparison of different algorithms and their accuracy in tackling this problem. Second, the effect of the horizon of prediction on model performance was studied. Third, the data was segmented into different subsets based on climatic zones and maintenance history to cancel out the noise and study the behaviour of roads in each subset and compare them with the aggregate dataset.
Machine learning algorithms
Multiple machine learning algorithms were deployed in this study. Since ensemble learning algorithms based on decision trees and naïve Bayes classifier coupled with kernel estimation had the highest accuracy, they are briefly explained here. Decision trees are among the most frequently used machine learning algorithms due to their simplicity and interpretability [53,80]. However, their accuracy is usually low. Using ensemble learning techniques can improve the accuracy of decision trees [29]. Two common examples of ensemble learning algorithms based on decision trees are random forest and gradient boosted trees.
Decision trees are developed using information gain, which is a concept based on entropy [29,62]. A decision tree segments the data based on the attributes that result in the largest decrease in system disorder or entropy (or have the largest information gain). It continues segmenting the data until it reaches a pure enough leaf in which the majority of the data belong to a certain class. Entropy, which is a measure of disorder, can be formulated as Eq. (1), and information gain is the change in entropy after segmenting the data based on an attribute.
where, pi is the probability of belonging to class i (thus the sum of pis is equal to 1) and c is the number of classes.
A random forest is a famous ensemble learning algorithm developed based on decision trees. A random forest divides the training set into a number of random subsets (see Fig. 15). It then trains a decision tree (also called a base learner) based on each subset. The final prediction of the algorithm is based on a majority vote among the base learners. Another tree-based ensemble learning algorithm is gradient boosted trees. A main difference between this algorithm and random forest (as well as bagging and boosting in general) is that the final prediction is not simply based on majority vote [29]. Instead, a gradient boosted trees algorithm considers the weighted predictions of the base learners, assigning smaller weights to less accurate trees [58].
Unlike a decision tree, random forest and gradient boosted trees do not yield an explicit model. However, one could interpret them using the importance factor they produce for different attributes. The importance of variables in these algorithms is calculated based on the same formula used by their base learner. For instance, if a tree is trained based on entropy or Gini index, the ensemble of trees (e.g., random forest) will utilize the same formula for ranking the variables. The only difference is that ensemble algorithms average out the importance of attributes over all base learners [57]. Therefore, the formula for calculating the importance of attribute xl is as follows [29].
Il = M m=1 I (Tm)	(2)  where Il 2 is the importance of attribute xl, I2(Tm) is the importance of that attribute in decision tree m, and M is the number of trees (i.e., base learners).
Naïve Bayes classifier is a simple and popular algorithm based on Bayes rule. It classifies data by assuming independence among predictive attributes [58,62]. Therefore, the probability of a data point belonging to class yh given a certain value of predictive variables (X = xk) may be formulated as Eq. (3) [29].
where yh represents the hth possible value for variable Y (i.e., the target variable), xk represents the kth possible vector value for X (i.e., vector of predictive variables), and the summation in the denominator is over all possible values of the variable Y.
Prior and conditional probabilities are directly computed from the training set. The class class-conditional densities of continuous variables are estimated using a univariate Gaussian distribution, and discrete variables are estimated using a histogram. In reality, the distribution of continuous variables may deviate from normal distribution. Kernel density estimation can be used in order to develop a more realistic estimate for the density of conditional marginal functions and hence a more accurate prediction [58]. After using this localization technique, a local smoothing is required, which could be performed using different functions, including Gaussian or Epanechnikov [29]. Using a kernel estimate, a function can be estimated at point x0 as Eq. (4).
Kλ(x0,xi) = D hλ(x0) where ̂f(x0) is the estimate of function f at a point x0, hλ(x0) is the width function, which determines the width of the neighborhood (which can be a constant such as λ = 0.1 as well) and D is the smoothing function (e. g., Gaussian and Epanechnikov function).
The data was retrieved from the LTPPP database. This open database contains the information of more than 2500 road sections across the US and Canada [31]. This database does not include the PCI, but it has the necessary data for its calculation (i.e., distresses and their severity levels). So, the first step was to generate PCI values from distress data provided in LTPP. This task was performed according to ASTM D 6433–07 guideline [78]. With this aim, the ASTM curves, which are only available as hardcopies, were digitized (each curve was transferred into a mathematical formula). This was used to add PCI values for road segments in LTPP. PCI values were classified into five categories:
The accuracy of different models in predicting the PCI in three years (only for dry and no-freeze climatic region).
Type of Model
20 single learners
20 single learners
Decision tree I
Decision tree II (C4.5)
Naïve Bayes classifier
Naïve Bayes classifier with kernel
their future con



Satisfactory (100%)
Satisfactory (97%)
Satisfactory, Fair, Poor, and Very Poor (see Fig. 1).
PCI changes with maintenance. Therefore, only the data of the roads that have not gone under maintenance during the prediction horizon was used. Table 3 shows the number of examples for each prediction horizon. The training set for predicting the deterioration in two years has the largest number of examples and the six years the smallest.
Several classification algorithms were trained to predict the future PCI class. These models included two types of decision trees, k-nearest neighbors (k-NN), naïve Bayes classifier, naïve Bayes coupled with kernels, random forest and gradient boosted trees. The models were meant to predict the level of PCI after two, three, five and six years. The details of parameter tuning and algorithm comparisons are skipped for brevity, but a summary of accuracy levels and parameters are given in Table 4 for a prediction time horizon of three years (for a detailed theoretical analysis refer to [57–59]. The accuracy levels shown in Table 4 are the result of a tenfold cross-validation and a 75: 25 training- test split.
Random forest and gradient boosted trees, examples of ensemble learning algorithms, had a significantly higher accuracy compared to their base learners (i.e., decision tree I). Both types of decision trees were more accurate than linear classifiers (i.e., naïve Bayes classifier and logistic regression). Coupling the naïve Bayes classifier with kernels increased its accuracy dramatically. Regarding prediction intervals, it was observed that the shorter the horizon, the higher the accuracy. Therefore, the accuracy of the models for predicting the PCI within two years were higher than the numbers in Table 4. The values for five and six years were lower.
Furthermore, the data was segmented into four climatic zones: dry, freeze; dry, non-freeze; wet, freeze; and wet, non-freeze. The results shown in Table 4 are only for the second cluster. It was observed that despite the smaller size of the training set the models had a higher accuracy in each climatic region compared to the aggregate data. This is a result of eliminating a part of the noise by adding an additional constraint. Furthermore, the models achieved the highest accuracy in dry, non-freeze region and the lowest in wet, freeze.
The algorithms were implemented in an online platform coupled with a map. To show the functionality of the platform two examples were assessed: Example I about four single roads in different locations and Example II about two sets of roads in Ontario and Texas.
Example I is limited to condition prediction, but Example II investigates the impact of climate change as well. Table 5 shows input data for the four roads selected for Example I as well as the results of predictions for each road, after 2, 3, 5 and 6 years.
Two sets of roads were selected to investigate how the change in the selected climate stressors will impact their deterioration. This process is shown in Fig. 4. The first group of roads was selected from Ontario (PCIO0), which belongs to the third climatic region, and the second from Texas (PCIT0), which is in the second region. Each set contained 44 roads with similar aggregate initial conditions (PCIO0 and PCIT0). Inside each group, however, roads may have different PCI values, different traffics and maintenance histories. The deterioration for each set was examined assuming they existed (with the same conditions) in two snapshots of time: 2018 (Ta) and 2098 (Td). For brevity, the results for other snapshots and climate change scenarios, shown in dashed lines in Fig. 4, are skipped here. The predictions were conducted for each set and for each year over the following 2, 3, 5, and 6 years.
Detailed modeling of different climate change scenarios for each road section is beyond the scope of this paper. Although infinite number of climate change scenarios could be studied, the scope of Example II was limited to the following. For the roads located in Ontario, it was assumed that the temperature (MAX_ANN_TEMP_AVG) will increase by 6 ◦C, the annual freeze index and number of freeze thaw cycles will decrease proportionally, and the annual precipitation will increase by 10%. Note that all these numbers are within the projection range of RCP8.5 scenario for the climate of Ontario in year 2098 [17,32,53]. For the roads in Texas, it is assumed that that the maximum temperature will increase by increase by 4.5 ◦C, the annual precipitation will not change, and the freeze index and freeze thaw will decrease by 20% [43]. Note that in this case the initial PCI of the roads (i.e., PCI in year 2098) is assumed to be the same as their initial PCI in year 2018. The predictions were performed using a gradient boosted decision trees algorithm, which was among the most reliable models.
The base condition of roads (PCIO0 and PCIT0) are shown in the left cluster of bars in Figs. 5 and 6. Therefore, PCIO0 (Fig. 6) included 22 roads in Good conditions, 5 in Satisfactory, 8 in Fair, 4 in Poor and 5 in Very poor. Similarly, the first cluster on Fig. 6 shows PCIT0: 22 in Good, 6 in Satisfactory, and 8 in Fair, 4 in Poor and 4 in Very Poor conditions.
Condition prediction for 44 roads in Ontario under the current climate.
The remaining sets of bars in each figure show how each set deteriorates in the following 2, 3, 5, and 6 years. The input to the model in both cases are based on the current climate attributes. Generally, the model predicted that the roads located in Ontario will experience a more aggressive deterioration. In Fig. 5, the model predicted that 15 roads in Ontario deteriorate to Very Poor after 6 years, whereas in Fig. 6 this number is only 11. Although this study does not intend to venture into the notion of causality, it is worth noting that these two different deterioration regimes are not merely a result of different climates of Texas and Ontario. These two groups of roads have different traffic, materials and maintenance history. For instance, the AADT of the roads in Ontario is almost twice as large as their counterparts in Texas. One of the advantages of the proposed framework is that all these variables are represented in the input data that is fed into the predictive models –something that PCI deterioration master curves are incapable of considering [57,79].
The predictive model was run another time for the same roads of Figs. 5 and 6 with the same conditions in 2098 climate. The results for the two sets are shown in Figs. 7 and 8. Note that the first cluster of bars in Figs. 7 and 8 are the same as Figs. 5 and 6. Comparing these four Figures sheds some light on the long-term impacts of climate change. In the case of roads in Ontario (Figs. 5 and 7), virtually for all roads and all prediction horizons, the deterioration became less aggressive. The number of roads in Very Poor condition is smaller in each prediction horizon compared to Fig. 5. On the other hand, the number of roads in Good condition in Fig. 7 (in each time horizon) is always larger than their counterparts in Fig. 5. The situation is not the same for the roads in Texas. After applying the climate change scenario, the model predicts more roads degrade to Poor and Very Poor classes, and less roads remaining in Good conditions (Fig. 8). This means that the change is going to be more destructive in Texas.
Condition prediction for 44 roads in Texas under the current climate.
Condition prediction for 44 roads in Ontario under a climate change scenario.
To better quantify the delta in PCI deterioration caused by climate change, the mean and standard deviation of PCI were written below each bin. So, μ is the mean of initial PCI of different roads, and σ is their standard deviation. Also, μ(i) and σ(i) are the mean and standard deviation of predicted PCI values in i years. For a newly constructed group of roads μ will be close to 100, and σ will be ideally close to 0. With the passage of time the mean PCI will degrade, and the standard deviation will increase. Without any maintenance and under an extreme deterioration, the mean PCI will deteriorate to 0, so is the standard deviation. Nonetheless, the reality is always something in-between, given that the roads will receive numerous remedial actions. Asset managers usually want to keep the μ(i) and σ(i) above and below a certain threshold, respectively, to keep the level of service acceptable and reliable. The mean PCI of each bin for both Ontario and Texas roads is shown in Fig. 9. Therefore, Fig. 9 includes four curves, two for each set of roads before and after applying climate change. This figure makes aggregate cross- comparison easier and clearly shows that the effect of climate change on Texas and Ontario roads is different.
Another approach to interpret the results of Figs. 5 to 9 is to consider the short-term and long-term behaviour of roads. It is known that roads behave differently in short- and long-term because of different maintenance, traffic, or climate. If the prediction of two and three years reflect the behaviour of the road in short-term, and the five- and six-years predictions represent the long-term behaviour, the following observations could be made. It is observed in Fig. 9 that the short-term deterioration for both groups of roads is similar, but in longer horizons the impact of climate change becomes more visible. It means that the impact of climate change over the long-term collective deterioration is considerably clearer. This could mean that by the end of 21st century, under this climate change scenario, the decisionmakers in Ontario may realize higher levels of services for roads (higher PCI) for the same maintenance schemes (and funding) used today.
Overall, the results show that, first, the impact of climate change on different roads could be different based on their location and other attributes. While the applied climate change scenario resulted in less aggressive deterioration for roads in Ontario, its impact on the roads in Texas was more destructive. Such objective modeling and observations can answer many questions about policymaking in areas such as climate change resilience financing, climate justice and carbon pricing.
Condition prediction for 44 roads in Texas under a climate change scenario.
Average PCI deterioration under different climates for roads in Texas and Ontario.
An interactive online decision-support tool was introduced to predict the future road conditions under different circumstances. Since the training data was collected over a large geographic spread, and several relevant climate stressors were among the predictive attributes, the developed tool can be used to quantify the impact of climate change on roads. The prediction of condition was based on probabilistic machine learning techniques. Therefore, the results of the prediction could be used in more realistic risk assessment models, asset management and infrastructure policy development.
The impact of changing climate was considered by incorporating relevant climatic stressors such as precipitation, temperature, freeze index and freeze–thaw cycles. The users could input a range of possible values for any of these stressors and see the relevant changes over two, three, five and six years. When the user input a range of values, the model could iterate multiple times and predict the condition accordingly. While in this paper the user can change the input variables subjectively, in the course of future research more objective climate change scenarios could be fed into the model. For instance, the data of the scenarios proposed by the IPCC could be used as the input of the models. Using such comprehensive and objective climate change modeling approach could be highly beneficial knowing that different levels of government or different transportation agencies deal with very different sizes of road networks.
An immediate conclusion of this study is that climate change affects various regions differently; therefore, its impact on infrastructure is not going to be the same everywhere. The example of roads in Ontario and Texas confirmed this claim. For example, while the increase in temperature in some areas may ameliorate the freeze–thaw cycles and result in more relaxed deterioration, it will trigger these cycles in higher latitudes and could result in a more aggressive degradation.
This study had a few limitations in terms of quantifying the impact of climate change, which could be addressed in the future research. While the roads were located in different locations and had different attributes, the same climate change effect was applied to all roads within a state or province. This assumption was made for the sake simplification but, in reality, the roads located in North Ontario will experience a slightly
Digitizing a deduct value curve and finding the formula for pothole with medium severity (metric units) via curve fitting.
Sample calculation of GBE for a road section (LTPP section # 87-A340).
Thickness (in)
Thickness (mm)

Asphalt concrete
Asphalt concrete
Asphalt concrete
different climate from those located in the south. Therefore, the level of granularity of climate change scenarios could be modified. Another important point is the change in stressors such as freeze–thaw and freeze index. In this paper, it was assumed that these stressors are correlated with maximum average annual temperature. However, the real relationship is more complex and requires a more sophisticated modeling. Moreover, it is known that the impact of climate change on the higher latitudes will be the most discernible. Therefore, the roads located in the highest latitudes, such as northern provinces of Canada need a specific study.
Last but not least, the impact of climate change on roads should not be reduced to climatic stressors such as precipitation, temperature and freeze–thaw cycles. Climate change will most probably create major economic and political changes resulting in major waves of immigration. When it comes to studying the impact of these changes on road infrastructure, this feature could be represented by attributes such as the AADT. So, the proposed model could potentially capture these factors as well. However, their incorporation requires careful modeling and prediction of future traffic.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
S. Madeh Piryonesi: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Data curation, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Investigation, Validation. Tamer El-Diraby: Project administration, Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
A schematic representation of the information flow between the web page and the server supporting the online portal.
The results of PCI prediction in five years for the roads of Table 5 shown on the front-end of the portal.
The LTPP database does not include PCI. To calculate PCI the ASTM curves were digitized and their formulae were extracted. An example of extracting the formula for a deduct value curve is provided here. First, 121 points were selected on the deduct value curve. The points were drawn in a scatter chart with a logarithmic scale on × axis. A quartic function was fitted to the points, and as shown in Fig. 10, the coefficient of correlation was very close to 1. The formula of fitted polynomial function is shown on both Fig. 10 and in Eq. (5).
y = − 1.49x4 − 0.25x3 +14.63x2 +39.04x+30.51; R2 = 0.999	(5) where y is the deduct value, x is the logarithm of distress density and R2 is the coefficient of correlation.
Because of the role of different pavement characteristics in all models, it was decided to investigate if adding related attributes can enhance the accuracy of the models. An obvious option was the impact of different layers of pavement. For this purpose, the data of different layers in each section was queried from the LTPP dataset. Later, the thicknesses of these layers were transferred to granular base equivalent (GBE) thickness. Approximate layer equivalencies were extracted from TAC Pavement Design and Management Guide. As shown in Table 6, thicknesses of different types of layers are converted by different coefficients. It is worth mentioning that the data of pavement layers in the LTPP is uniquely defined by three attributes: STATE_CODE, SHRP_ID and CONSTRUCTION_NO. Table 6 shows an example of calculating GBE for an LTPP section.
Appendix C. . Development of the web portal
The trained models were implemented into an online decision-support tool, which is coupled with a map. Fig. 11 shows a schematic overview of how the online portal functions. This user-interactive portal has two major modules. First, a front-end webpage that is available to users. Second, a server that is responsible for analytics, storing data and visualization. As shown in Fig. 11, the front-end webpage contains the fields that allow users to input data. This part of the user-interface is created by a static HTML code. In addition to direct input, the platform also has the capability of reading from a file, in case a user wants to upload the data of a group of roads collectively. Once the user enters the name and information of a road, the webpage will send a request to the server-end. The server will then respond with the map data. A map on the other side of the page will display the
A brief illustration of the workflow in the online platform using the example of a road in Ontario (Road #1 in Table 5).
A decision tree predicting the PCI of road after five years.
The process of reading from the map is briefly explained below.
Users will mainly interact with the front-end webpage. They can input the data of a road such as its name and any related attribute from Table 1. Each field could be input either as a single number or a range of possible values. These data will be fed into a dynamic program written in JavaScript. This program could conduct the prediction locally for models such as decision trees or naïve Bayes classifier that do not include a computationally intensive process. However, more computationally complex models, such as ensemble learning algorithms, could be run on the server side. Another case in which the server conducts the calculation is when the users inputs a range of values rather than a single number for climatic attributes. For instance, when the user wants to see the behaviour of a road when the annual precipitation changes from 800 mm to 1100 mm. In this case the model
A schematic representation of an ensemble learning algorithm such as random forest.
Relative importance of different variables for predicting the PCI of road after 5 years. The scores are an output of a gradient boosted trees algorithm.
needs to be run multiple times, and this iteration of models needs computational power. Therefore, the JavaScript program is also responsible for communication with the server or any other external servers such as Google Maps. In simple words, when the task is too heavy for the front-end page, the script will send a request to the server and query for its response. The server will open a port to communicate with the front page. A back-end program written in Java is triggered to handle front-end request. Analyzing the map data is an example such complex tasks that is facilitated by the server.
Raw map data was fetched from OpenStreetMap [50], which is an open source editable map. The extracted data was stored in the server waiting for the service program to operate. The OpenStreetMap raw data is in XML format. Service program will have to use an external library called VTD-XML from Ximpleware [81] to operate the map data. The name of every road is then transferred into an array of longitude and latitude coordinates that can be graphically represented on the map. Since JavaScript could support JSON data, every response by the server is represented in JSON format. The service program uses another external library called Gson from Google. Responses from the service program will be transferred into JSON String and then sent to the front-end. The response will be shown on a map as a road in certain a color depending on its class of future PCI. This process is illustrated in Fig. 13, which contains an example from a real in Ontario, Canada.
To demonstrate the functionality of the map two different examples were studied above. The first example included predicting the condition of four different individual roads in four jurisdictions, and the second example included two groups of roads one in Ontario and one in Texas. The graphical results of PCI prediction for the roads of Table 5 are shown in Fig. 12. As, shown in Fig. 12, when the user queries a road and inputs its data, the model will predict the condition and color the road accordingly. The predictions of Fig. 12 are for five years, but the user can switch between different horizons of prediction using a sliding button.
The general workflow of the online platform was explained above. Let us examine its performance using Road #1 of Table 5 as an example.
Conditional class distribution for annual precipitation based on a Gaussian function.
Conditional class distribution for annual precipitation using a kernel density estimation.
road is located in Ontario, Canada. As shown in Figs. 12 and 13, its name is King’s College Circle. The tasks of Fig. 13 are numbered in the order they are conducted. As explained above, first, the name of the road and its information is input and queried. The future PCI will be calculated using a gradient boosted trees algorithm or either of the algorithms of Table 4. Next, a request containing the name and location of the road is sent to the server. The server compares the name with the XML data of OpenStreetMap and will choose the road with the same name tag (i.e., King’s College Circle) in that geographic location. The nodes on the road with this name and their coordinates will be extracted and later will be sent to the front-end in a JSON format. Note that in this case, that the road has two separate segments, the format will be as [[segment1], [segment2]], and each segment will contain longitudes and latitudes as [{lat1, lng1}, {lat2, lng2}, …, {latn, lngn}]. Eventually, this JSON string will be sent back to the front-end and printed on the map with the future PCI in red, which represents Poor condition.
Appendix D: Details of machine learning algorithms
This section provides further details on the outputs of some of the trained models. As mentioned, a popular feature of a decision tree is that it results in an explicit model with graphic representation. This makes using and interpreting it very convenient. For example, Fig. 14 shows a decision tree predicting the PCI of asphalt roads in five years. Note that this is a ‘pruned’ tree for illustration purposes with parameters different from Table 4 values, with only a part it shown for clarity. A path on the tree is highlighted representing a decision tree rule, which can be interpreted as follows. When the initial PCI is larger than 70.45, the annual average of daily maximum temperatures is less than 29.4 ◦C and the annual precipitation is less than 171.65 mm the road will end up being in a Satisfactory condition. Note the different colors of the leaves indicating impurity, which can provide a tool to estimate the probability of belonging to a class.
As mentioned, decision trees are not the most accurate or robust algorithms. That is why ensemble learning tree-based algorithms, such as random forest and gradient boosted trees, are used. These models, however, do not yield an interpretable model. Fig. 15 schematically explains how an ensemble learning algorithm works. One output of these models that can help interpretation and provide some input on the nature of predictive attributes is the importance score.
Fig. 16 shows the relative importance of different predictive attributes. These normalized scores are the outputs of a gradient boosted trees algorithm predicting PCI in five years. As shown in Fig. 16, the initial PCI is the most important attribute followed by the type of last remedial action and minimum temperature. Note the similarity between this graph and the hierarchy of attributes in the decision tree, with PCI0 being on top.
Naïve Bayes classifier is another algorithm used in this paper. An approach to improve the accuracy of a naïve Bayes classifier is to couple it with a kernel density estimator. As mentioned, a naïve Bayes classifier uses a Gaussian function to estimate the density of conditional marginal functions (i.e., P(X|Y)). However, this function may not fit the real data. For example, Fig. 17 shows the distribution of TOTAL_ANN_PRECIP (i.e., total annual precipitation) for different classes of PCI. This is the output of a naïve Bayes classifier predicting the PCI in five years with a cross-validation accuracy of 58.42 ± 7.41. By using a kernel estimator and using only two kernels (see Fig. 18) the accuracy increased to 64.33 ± 5.16.
The reason behind the higher accuracy of the algorithm with kernel is the more accurate estimation of these distributions. Comparing Figs. 17 and 18 can provide some insight in this regard. Fig. 17 shows that a road with a future PCI of Poor or Very Poor (i.e., y = Poor or y = Very Poor), the probability of receiving –100 mm of precipitation is non-zero. Clearly, this estimation is inaccurate because precipitation cannot be negative. However, in Fig. 18, which is based on two kernels, this probability is near zero. Therefore, the more realistic estimation of Fig. 18 resulted in a higher
accuracy for the classifier.
