Developing BIM-Based Linked Data Digital Twin Architecture to Address a Key Missing Factor:
Soroush Sobhkhiz1 and Tamer El-Diraby2
1Dept. of Civil and Mineral Engineering, Univ. of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
2I2C Center, Dept. of Civil and Mineral Engineering, Univ. of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. tamer@ecf.utoronto.ca
This study reviews the concept of Digital Twins (DTs) and related studies in the construction industry and identifies three key factors that is missing from the current practices. The missing factors are: (1) inadequate consideration of occupants in DT models, (2) lack of the inclusion of unstructured data, and (3) absence of Linked Data technologies. To address these issues, architecture for the design of DTs is proposed and partially implemented in a case study. The proposed architecture utilizes semantic web technologies and proposes a linked data approach to integrate different data sources of a DT. Further, the architecture leverages machine learning approaches to dynamically update and enrich the linked data platform and automate its maintenance. The case study takes the first step to integrate BIM and unstructured data generated by occupants (as work orders) using a linked-data approach. The research sets the path for future works in the domain of building DTs.
Many problems in the construction industry originate from the fragmentation of its stakeholders and sections (Heravi et al. 2021). As such, it is frequently argued that the industry is in a dire need to reengineer its business processes and widely adopt automation technologies, such as Building Information Modeling (BIM) (Chen et al. 2018). However, several studies have critiqued the actual effectiveness of BIM. To this date, the entrenched approach to design remains in organization-based silos rather than a truly integrated one (Mohd et al. 2014). This is specially observed in the operation stages of a building where only a miniscule of data is available from the construction and design stages. The very design of BIM is incapable of addressing the dynamic requirements of the operation stage. The operation stage requires integration of data from a variety of sources for different applications which cannot be properly addressed with the semantic capabilities of BIM (Boje et al. 2020). Many studies tried to extend BIM by integrating it with other systems such as IoT devices, sensors, and cloud technologies. However, a seamless integration and extension is not yet achieved in an industrial level.
It can be argued that efforts in addressing the operational management requirements of buildings led the construction industry to adopt a relatively new technology called Digital Twins (DTs). There is no agreed upon definition in the construction industry for DTs as the technology is still at its infancy in the building industry. Currently, research is overly focused on the design of DTs, rather than its implementations and services. As such, it is important to investigate the role and definition of DTs and discuss the critical factors that might be missing in the current practices. This article highlights that Occupant considerations, Unstructured data Sources, and linked data technologies are three key areas that have not received adequate attention. Following the discussion an architecture is proposed to address the gap and a prototype partially implementing the architecture is presented in a case study,
In this section, we highlight some key studies in recent years that can provide some insights on where the industry is going with the DTs and what the challenges are with the current practices. Table 1 lists the studies, the type of the studies, and their applications reviewed in this article. It is crucial to note that, for a DT to be able to have a full picture of the ongoing conditions of a building, it needs access to not only the facilities and assets of the building, but also its key stakeholders being operators and occupants. Current systems mostly receive the data in a structured form from physical assets. Among the reviewed studies only two of them accounted for the unstructured data in their systems. In a recent study by Mohammadi et al. (2020) the lack of unstructured data is acknowledged, and a framework is proposed which collects social media data from users in Twitter. This work is a good example of potential values that can be achieved by extending the data sources of Digital Twins. In addition, another key missing factor in most of the current practices and definitions of DTs is the lack of people. Occupants are hardly modeled or included in the proposed solutions. Some studies are starting to address this matter by collecting user feedback (Wu and Liu 2019) or by collecting their social media posts (Mohammadi et al. 2020). However, these are at very preliminary stages. There is hardly ever a model for occupant data, and their role is summarized to feedbacks or comments.
Lack of data models is not the only problem. Being able to triangulate the significant volume of data streams from different sources is also a crucial issue (Erfani et al. 2021). One of the key challenges is how the data should be linked so that an integrated analysis can become feasible (Erfani et al. 2021). Currently, solutions are too ad-hoc to be generalized, and without a standard solution it will be hard to achieve high-level city DTs and put all the data into use. A DT needs to be able to present the data and its semantics in its entirety which is currently very difficult to achieve. Although not by many, linked data paradigm has been introduced as a potential solution to this issue. Boje et al. (2020) proposed a semantic DT which highlights the need for a linked data solution. Similar studies highlight the crucial role of semantic web in addressing data challenges specially in BIM-based solutions (Sobhkhiz et al. 2021). With linked data, there is no longer the need to having to extend the IFC and BIM abilities so that it can include data from other sources. BIM becomes only a part of the whole building data. Nevertheless, we do not see many studies implementing the technology in practice when it comes to DTs. In one of the few works on the issue, Austin et al. (2020) highlight the challenges that exist in architecting a smart city DT for automated decision making. They combined semantic web and machine learning for knowledge representation of city data and the usability is showcased in a case study on city energy usage analysis.
THE GAP & RESEARCH OBJECTIVE
In summary, the key research gaps that should be further studied can be summarized into the following three:
1- Lack of people and occupants in the Digital Twin models
2- Being overly focused on the modeling of structured data and ignoring the vast amount of knowledge embedded in the unstructured data
3- And lack of research on the practical use of semantic web technologies and linked data as the solution to data integration
This paper aims to investigate potential solutions and propose a holistic DT architecture addressing the issues discussed above. Next, the initial developments of a prototype DT based on the linked data paradigm is showcased. The prototype aims to link the unstructured data of occupants to BIM and other sources of structured data to take the first steps in tackling the three key issues highlighted above and set the path for future research.
Table 1 – The reviewed papers for identifying critical missing factors in the current DT practices
This section aims to leverage previous studies to develop an architecture for the issues discussed above. Mainly, the section aims to address the inclusion of people and unstructured data into a linked data platform at the center of DTs. Modeling people, both operators and occupants, with all the dynamic and unpredictable behaviors they have is indeed a difficult task (perhaps the most difficult part of developing a DT). Nevertheless, there are numerous studies on gathering data from and interacting with occupants in other domains (mostly in energy-related studies), which can be used as references. Including people in DT should aim for capturing their feedback, informing them, and engaging them in the design and management of buildings which will result in more sustainable buildings with the well-being of occupants in the center (Coleman et al. 2018). Engaging and modeling people will require leveraging visualization tools (such as AR), expert knowledge capture, analysis of unstructured data, and data integration solutions (to integrate people data with a DT). From a technological perspective, it is difficult to structure a specific methodology as to how people will be included as a segment of DTs. Here we argue that Artificial Intelligence and Linked Data are the two critical technologies and in the following we discuss their potential roles in addressing the research gaps discussed above.
As Digital Twins are aiming to eventually become the virtual replica of a physical entity; it can be imagined that any physical data will be available in the digital model at some point. As a result, with this amount of diverse data, any imaginable analysis can be done. However, the current body of knowledge has a long way to reach such an advanced level of modeling in the realm of DTs (at least in the building domain). This means that Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning should not only be used to conduct analysis on the DT’s data, but they should also be used to improve the overall architecture of DTs (and move towards the advanced levels discussed above). As a result, it can be argued that the applications of ML will be categorized in two themes of 1) ML applications for improving the architecture of DTs and 2) ML applications to provide valueadded services. Since the second category of applications is widely explored in the literature, here we further discuss the first category.
Development and maintenance of links between the massive diverse data of a DT requires a thorough analysis of concepts in each domain of data and a comprehensive identification of links between data and concepts from different domains. Of course, human capabilities in identifying these concepts and the links between them is very limited and the automation of this process is essential. Machine Learning algorithms can learn from the data and its architecture and identify new links (e.g., association algorithms), concepts (e.g., clustering and topic modeling), and rules (e.g., rule mining). The work of Austin et al. (2020) presents a very good example on how this can be achieved. In addition, ML can help in maintaining the data by assigning data instances to their predefined model element. For instance, a raw data (particularly unstructured data) needs to be stored in the right place within a database. Moreover, not all the data needs storage and specific valuable components needs to be extracted from it before storage. ML can automate this process by mining the data and classifying it into the right class.
Figure 1 – How ML can help the development and maintenance of DTs
As discussed in the literature review, semantic web technologies are being increasingly recognized as the ultimate solution to data integration and data management challenges of digital twins. Nevertheless, research on the application of linked data technologies in DTs is still at theoretical stages and there are very handful of studies investigating actual implementations. Even these studies are limited in many ways such as: 1) limited data sources, 2) limited practical applications that justify the use of such technologies or showcase its limitations and pave the way for future research. The general approach to developing a linked data platform is to first transform data from different sources into RDF (resource description framework) and use domain ontologies (e.g., ifcOWL, Building Topology Ontology), to model and link the data together. To maintain the complex structure of the knowledge graph, ML algorithms can be used to improve the ontologies, their linkage, and rules (Austin et al. 2020). The results will be an integrated platform linking people to buildings and their assets. Figure 2 shows the overall architecture that will be obtained. Such a platform will potentially improve current practices by accounting for unstructured data, people, and semantics.
Figure 2 – The proposed architecture for DTs
This section presents the initial developments of a DT prototype following the guidelines discussed in the previous section. The prototype presented in this section integrates BIM and Occupant work requests in a linked-data environment for the following objectives. As far as we know, this work is the first work that proposes a linked-data approach for integrating unstructured data into the design of a Digital Twin. Moreover, no previous study was found for the ontological representation of work order data, and this can be considered another contribution of this study.
1- Work orders are usually in the form of unstructured data and addressing them can account for the lack of inclusion of unstructured data in Digital Twins.
2- The integration adopts a linked-data approach to showcase the advantages of linked data technologies in practice
3- Work orders are submitted by occupants and can be considered a source of communication between occupants and buildings. Work orders are especially useful for accounting occupant needs and requirement.
Figure 3 shows the overall framework proposed for the linkage of work order data to BIM models. As shown, work order data are obtained from a Computerized Maintenance Management System (CMMS). By a context analysis on the work order data, we can develop an ontology data model. The details of this process will be provided in a future paper and only the final model is presented in this work (see Figure 4). Through a series of text-processing algorithms and conversion processes, the work order data is transformed and converted into the developed data model. In order to achieve a linked-data platform, other building data sources should also be converted into an ontological representation (RDF format). BIM can be used as the connection point of many (but not all) data sources. As such, in this study, BIM is used as a connection point for work order data. To this end, BIM models should also be converted into an ontological representation. Here, ontologies such as Building Topology Ontology (BOT) and ifcOWL can be used. Once both data sources are converted, the data can be linked as shown in Figure 4. With this connection other data sources such as sensors and weather data can also be linked.
Figure 3 – The proposed framework for linking work-order data to BIM
With this link, users can have better access to the data. For instance, Figure 5 shows how a user can make complex queries with the proposed method. Assume that a facility manager wants to see work orders submitted for a specific item or a room in a specific building. Even further, the manager might be interested in specific work orders for that room (e.g., room being thermally uncomfortable). Such requests are relatively difficult with current form of data management of buildings; And as a result, analyzing trends and root-causes of issues is very difficult with the current way of service order management. In an ideal scenario, the manager should be able to access the relevant info in an interactive environment. For instance, BIM provides a suitable environment for visualizing information and analyzing them. The proposed approach in this study can be a solution for developing such an environment.
Figure 6 shows a mock-up of how this process occurs within the BIM environment. The building used for representation is the Gage building at the University of Toronto – St. George campus. Autodesk Navisworks is used as the BIM software. In the BIM environment, when the user selects an element and runs the ‘Access to Linked-Data’ add-in, a new window appears which provides the relevant information of the selected element for the user. The building profile information (e.g., usage) is obtained from the building profile ontology (see Figure 5), and element info is obtained from the building ontology (BOT). The element’s GUID is used to link the selected element to the Building Data in RDF. Figure 5 shows an example of how such information can be accessed by using the data points linked to the element in the linked-data environment. The window also allows the user to conduct a query which in this case, the user queried the word ‘entrapment’. With the information about the location of the element, the add-in accesses to the work orders submitted to the building and runs a query.
It should be noted that the prototype in this study is presented as a mockup and more details will be provided in another study which will include a thorough evaluation of the system as well.
Figure 5 – The process of a user making complex queries from the linked-data platform
Figure 6 – a) The BIM model of the building used in the case study, b) User selecting the elevator door, c) User running the Linked-Data Access add-in and running a query

Digital Twins are at their infancy in the construction industry, and it is essential to identify critical factors that should be included in their design. Through a review of current practices, this research shows that currently, despite their importance, occupants are not adequately considered in the design of Building DTs. In addition, the data is almost always collected in a structured form from sensors, Building Automation/Management Systems, or other systems. However, a huge portion of building data is unstructured in the form of written documents and texts. A successful DT requires access to all these data, however, the access to such a diverse range of data poses another challenge, data integration. Without the ability to triangulate all the data sources, access to them will not be valuable. Despite their potentials, Linked-Data technologies are absent from current DT implementations. This research proposes an extended DT architecture to address the above issues and showcases its potentials by partially implementing it in a case study. Future studies can continue to extend the work and cover other aspects of the proposed architecture.
Austin, M., Delgoshaei, P., Coelho, M., and Heidarinejad, M. 2020. Architecting Smart City Digital Twins: Combined Semantic Model and Machine Learning Approach. Journal of Management in Engineering, 36(4), p.04020026.
Boje, C., Guerriero, A., Kubicki, S., and Rezgui, Y. 2020. Towards a semantic Construction Digital Twin: Directions for future research. Automation in Construction, 114, p.103179.
Chen, Q., García de Soto, B., and Adey, B. T. 2018. “Construction automation: Research areas, industry concerns and suggestions for advancement.” Autom. Constr. 94 (June):
Cheng, J. C., Chen, W., Chen, K., and Wang, Q. 2020. Data-driven predictive maintenance planning framework for MEP components based on BIM and IoT using machine learning algorithms. Automation in Construction, 112, p.103087.
Coleman, S., Touchie, M. F., Robinson, J. B., and Peters, T. 2018. Rethinking performance gaps: A regenerative sustainability approach to built environment performance assessment. Sustainability, 10(12), p.4829.
Ding, K., Shi, H., Hui, J., Liu, Y., Zhu, B., Zhang, F., and Cao, W. 2018, March. Smart steel bridge construction enabled by BIM and Internet of Things in industry 4.0: A framework. In 2018 IEEE 15th International Conference on Networking, Sensing and Control (ICNSC) (pp. 1-5).
Erfani, A., Tavakolan, M., Mashhadi, A. H., and Mohammadi, P. 2021. Heterogeneous or homogeneous? A modified decision-making approach in renewable energy investment projects. AIMS Energy, 9(3), pp.558-580.
Erfani, A., Zhang, K., and Cui, Q. 2021. TAB Bid Irregularity: Data-Driven Model and Its Application. Journal of Management in Engineering, 37(5), p.04021055.
Francisco, A., Mohammadi, N., and Taylor, J. E. 2020. Smart City Digital Twin–Enabled Energy Management: Toward Real-Time Urban Building Energy Benchmarking. Journal of Management in Engineering, 36(2), p.04019045.
Heravi, G., Taherkhani, A. H., Sobhkhiz, S., Mashhadi, A. H., and Zahiri-Hashemi, R. 2021. Integrating risk management’s best practices to estimate deep excavation projects’ time and cost. Built Environment Project and Asset Management.
Khajavi, S. H., Motlagh, N. H., Jaribion, A., Werner, L. C., and Holmström, J. 2019. Digital Twin: Vision, Benefits, Boundaries, and Creation for Buildings. IEEE Access, 7, pp.147406-147419.
Lin, Y. C., and Cheung, W. F. 2020. Developing WSN/BIM-Based Environmental Monitoring Management System for Parking Garages in Smart Cities. Journal of Management in Engineering, 36(3), p.04020012.
Lu, Q., Parlikad, A. K., Woodall, P., Don Ranasinghe, G., Xie, X., Liang, Z., Konstantinou, E., Heaton, J., and Schooling, J. 2020. Developing a Digital Twin at Building and City Levels: Case Study of West Cambridge Campus. Journal of Management in Engineering, 36(3), p.05020004.
Mohammadi, N., and Taylor, J. 2020, January. Knowledge Discovery in Smart City Digital Twins. In Proceedings of the 53rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences.
Mohd Nawi, M. N., Baluch, N. H., and Bahaudin, A. Y. 2014. Impact of fragmentation issue in construction industry: An overview. In MATEC web of conferences (Vol. 15, p. 01009). EDP Sciences.
Oliver, D., Adam, D., and Hudson-Smith, A. P. 2018. Living with a digital twin: Operational management and engagement using IoT and Mixed Realities at UCL’s Here East Campus on the Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park. In Giscience and Remote Sensing. GIS Research UK (GISRUK).
Pargmann, H., Euhausen, D., and Faber, R. 2018, April. Intelligent big data processing for wind farm monitoring and analysis based on cloud-technologies and digital twins: A quantitative approach. In 2018 IEEE 3rd International Conference on Cloud Computing and Big Data Analysis (ICCCBDA) (pp. 233-237).
Sobhkhiz, S., Taghaddos, H., Rezvani, M., and Ramezanianpour, A. M. 2021. Utilization of semantic web technologies to improve BIM-LCA applications. Automation in Construction, 130, p.103842.
Tang, S., Shelden, D. R., Eastman, C. M., Pishdad-Bozorgi, P., and Gao, X. 2019. A review of building information modeling (BIM) and the internet of things (IoT) devices integration:
Present status and future trends. Automation in Construction, 101, pp.127-139.
Tomko, M., and Winter, S. 2019. Beyond digital twins–A commentary. Environment and Planning B: Urban Analytics and City Science, 46(2), pp.395-399.
Wu, I., and Liu, C. C. A Visual and Persuasive Energy Conservation System Based on BIM and IoT Technology. Sensors. 2020 Jan;
Zheng, Y., Yang, S., and Cheng, H. 2019. An application framework of digital twin and its case study. Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing, 10(3), pp.1141-1153.
Construction Research Congress 2022	11
Construction Research Congress 2022	11
Construction Research Congress 2022
Construction Research Congress 2022
Construction Research Congress 2022	11
Construction Research Congress 2022
