Overview of the Application of “Fuzzy Techniques” in Construction Management ResearchAlbert P. C. Chan1; Daniel W. M. Chan, M.ASCE2; and John F. Y. Yeung3Abstract: During the last decade, “fuzzy techniques” have been increasingly applied to the research area of construction management discipline. To date, however, no paper has attempted to summarize and present a critique of the existing “fuzzy” literature. This paper, therefore, aims to comprehensively review the fuzzy literature that has been published in eight selected top quality journals from 1996 to 2005, these being Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, ASCE; Journal of Management in Engineering, ASCE; Construction Management and Economics; Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management; International Journal of Project Management; Building Research and Information; Building and Environment; and Benchmarking: An International Journal. It has been found that fuzzy research, as applied in construction management discipline in the past decade, can be divided into two broad fields, encompassing: 1 fuzzy set/fuzzy logic; and 2 hybrid fuzzy techniques, with the applications in four main categories, including: 1 decision making; 2 performance; 3 evaluation/assessment; and 4 modeling. The comprehensive review provided in this paper offers new directions for fuzzy research and its application in construction management. Based on a comprehensive literature review on the applications of fuzzy set/fuzzy logic, and hybrid fuzzy techniques in construction management research, an increasing trend of applying these techniques in construction management research is observed. Therefore, it is suggested that future research studies related to fuzzy techniques can be continuously applied to these four major categories. Fuzzy membership functions and linguistic variables in particular can be used to suit applications to solving problems encountered in the construction industry based on the nature of construction, which are widely regarded as complicated, full of uncertainties, and contingent on changing environments. Moreover, hybrid fuzzy techniques, such as neurofuzzy and fuzzy neural networks, can be more widely applied because they can better tackle some problems in construction that fuzzy set/fuzzy logic alone may not best suit. For example, neural networks are strong in pattern recognition and automatic learning while fuzzy set and fuzzy logic are strong in modeling certain uncertainties. Their combination can assist in developing models with uncertainty under some forms of pattern. Finally, an increasing trend of applying fuzzy techniques in the building science and environmental disciplines is also observed; it is believed that the application of fuzzy techniques will go beyond the construction management area into these disciplines as well.DOI: 10.1061/ASCECO.1943-7862.0000099CE Database subject headings: Fuzzy sets; Hybrid methods; Construction management; Research.
IntroductionThe application of “fuzzy techniques” has been gaining popularity to the research area of construction management over the past decade. Fuzzy techniques, as defined in this paper, refer to all fuzzy concepts, which include fuzzy set, fuzzy logic, and hybrid fuzzy techniques those that combining fuzzy set/fuzzy logic with other techniques, such as fuzzy neural network, neurofuzzy, fuzzy reasoning, fuzzy expert system, fuzzy analysis, and fuzzy1    Professor and Associate Head, Dept. of Building and Real Estate, Hong Kong Polytechnic Univ., Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.E-mail: bsachan@inet.polyu.edu.hk2    Assistant Professor, Dept. of Building and Real Estate, Hong Kong Polytechnic Univ., Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China. E-mail:bsdchan@inet.polyu.edu.hk3    Postdoctoral Fellow, Dept. of Building and Real Estate, Hong Kong Polytechnic Univ., Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China corresponding author. E-mail: bsjyeung@inet.polyu.edu.hk   Note. This manuscript was submitted on June 21, 2008; approved on May 21, 2009; published online on May 22, 2009. Discussion period open until April 1, 2010; separate discussions must be submitted for individual papers. This paper is part of the Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, Vol. 135, No. 11, November 1, 2009.©ASCE, ISSN 0733-9364/2009/11-1241–1252/$25.00.clustering. To date, nevertheless, no paper has attempted to summarize and present a critique of the existing “fuzzy” literature. The aim of this paper is to provide an overview of the application of fuzzy techniques in construction management research that has been published in eight selected top quality journals Chau 1997. In fact, fuzzy is widely accepted as a branch of modern mathematics when compared with traditional mathematics although its history has just over 40 years Zimmermann 2001. Its origin can be tracked back when Zadeh 1965 wrote a seminal paper in 1965 in which he introduced fuzzy sets sets with unsharp boundaries. These sets are in general in better agreement with the human mind because they work with shades of gray but not just black or white. Fuzzy sets are typically able to represent linguistic terms, for instance, warm, hot, high, and low. Table 1 records the most important events of the historical development of fuzzy techniques from 1965 to 1994. After 1994, fuzzy techniques are continuously applied to the research area of construction management.   The new millennium 2000 starts with over 30,000 publications in the area of “computational intelligence” or “soft computing” Zimmermann 2001. These are terms which have been coined during the first half of the 1990s, when fuzzy set, neural networks and evolutionary computing joined forces because they felt that there were strong synergies between these areas. ZimmermannTable 1. Historical Development and Application of Fuzzy Theories from 1965 to 1994YearMain event1965Prof. L.A. Zadeh of U.C. Berkeley first published a paper on fuzzy sets in the Information and Control Journal. He was the first academic who addressed the fuzzy concepts concretely and mathematically.19721. Prof. L.A. Zadeh proposed fuzzy control theory and approximation reasoning.2. Prof. Chi Yeah Shou Long and Prof. Kwun Yeah Tao Fu of Yi Tung Kone University set up “Fuzzy System Association” in Japan.19741. Prof. E.H. Mamdani of London University succeeded in applying Fuzzy Control Theory in steamed machine. He had successfullycompleted the first remote controller by using IF-THEN rule base and fuzzy theory, which was much better than the traditional PID remote controller.2. The Fuzzy Set and Its Applications Conference was jointly organized by Japan and the United States. This was the first time tointroduce the fuzzy theories to academics.1977Fuzzy theory was introduced in mainland China.1980The F.L. Smith Co. in Holland applied fuzzy theory to the automatic operation of cement making. This was the first commercialized product applying fuzzy theory.19811. China established “China Fuzzy Mathematics and System Association.” The members were mainly mathematicians who werespecialized in conducting research in the fuzzy mathematics theories. By doing so, fuzzy theory was strengthened in the scope of mathematics.2. China published “Journal of Fuzzy Mathematics,” the second journal on fuzzy theory. In 1987, it was renamed to “Fuzzy System and Mathematics.” Since then, China took a leading role in fuzzy mathematics theories.1982Prof. C.L. Tang of Wah Chong Polytechnic proposed grey theory and grey hazy sets. He proved fuzzy set was a special instance of grey hazy sets. Since then, grey theory became vital and it was successfully applied to weather prediction, system modeling, decision making, and so on.1984The International Fuzzy Systems Association was set up and Prof. H.J. Zimmermann of Technical University of Berlin was elected to be the chairman. At the same time, four branches were set up in North America, Japan, Europe, and China.1985The first Fuzzy IFSA World Congress was held in Spain. There were a total of 290 researchers from 29 countries attending the congress. It is of interest to note that the conference papers were mainly related to theoretical foundations, but not practical applications.19861. Japan set up “Japan Society of Fuzzy Theory and System SOFT.”2. Fuji electrical engineering, Fuji Facom and Tokyo Industry University had applied fuzzy control theory to manage the import of clearwater system and they had got a very good result.19871. The second Fuzzy IFSA World Congress was held in Tokyo. There were a total of 380 researchers from 25 countries attending thecongress. There were a total of 250 conference papers and many of them were related to practical applications.2. Japan first applied Fuzzy Control to successfully accomplish automatic driving systems.1988The first Neural Networks and Fuzzy Logic Applied Technical Conference were held in NASA.19891. The third Fuzzy IFSA World Congress was held in Seattle, and there were numerous conference papers on practical applications.2. The Laboratory for International Fuzzy Engineering Research was set up, which was mainly composed of industry practitioners,government officials, and academics.3. The “China’s Governmental Natural Science Funding Committee” funded 1,350 thousand RMB dollars to set up 35 tertiary schoolsand research organizations so as to investigate a research project entitled ‘Fuzzy Message Management and Mechanical Intelligence,’ which was led by Professor P.Z. Wang.4. The China Productivity Centre set up a Fuzzy Group to introduce fuzzy techniques and advocate the fuzzy theories.1991The fourth Fuzzy IFSA World Congress was held in Belgium.19931. An academic journal entitled “IEEE Transaction on Fuzzy Systems” was first published.2. The fifth Fuzzy IFSA World Congress was held in South Korea. The themes of conference papers included control system, imageprocessing, machine video, medical diagnosis, share prediction, synthetic assessment, management technology, and system research.3. The First Asia Fuzzy Symposium was held in Singapore.4. The first Fuzzy Theory and its Applications Conference was jointly organized by Tsing Wah University and Jiao Tong University.19941. The Republic of China Fuzzy Association was set up.2. The second Fuzzy Theory and its Applications Conference was held in Taiwan, which was jointly organized by Taiwan Universityand Taiwan Industrial Technical University.3. The sixth Fuzzy IFSA World Congress was held in the United States.4. “Fuzzy theories” were further developed prosperously.Note: Source: Translated from Lin and Pang 1994; permission has been obtained for both print and online use from the authors.2001 further stated that evolutionary computing has its strength in optimization while neural nets are particularly strong in pattern recognition and automatic learning. Fuzzy set/fuzzy logic has its strength in modeling, interfacing humans with computers and modeling certain uncertainties. The Unite States, Japan, and mainland China are probably the most important nations to de-velop fuzzy theories and fuzzy technology. Lin and Pang 1994 asserted that although fuzzy techniques were originated in the United States, their developments and applications are both less intensive and extensive than in Japan, where fuzzy control is widely recognized and applied. In many consumer products like washing machines and cameras, fuzzy controllers are used in order to obtain higher machine IQ and user-friendly products. Its use is also extended to other fields, including control of subway systems, image stabilization of video cameras, and autonomous control of helicopters. However, unlike Japan and the United States, fuzzy set and fuzzy logic are further developed by mathematicians in mainland China. The major achievements include the developments of: 1 molecule lattice theory; 2 fuzzy normed linear space; 3 fuzzy topolopy; 4 fuzzy measure and fuzzy integral; 5 fuzzy sets and fallowing shadow of random sets theory; 6 factor space theory; and 7 truth-valued-flows inference Lin and Pang 1994.“Fuzzy” DefinitionsFuzzy means blurred, indistinct in shape or outline, frayed or fluffy Oxford University 1993. In modern mathematical society, fuzzy is defined as a branch of modern mathematics that was formulated by Zadeh 1965 to model vagueness intrinsic in human cognitive process and to solve ill-defined and complicated problems because of ambiguous, incomplete, vague, and imprecise information that characterize the real-world system. It is appropriate for uncertain or approximate reasoning that involves human intuitive thinking Zimmermann 2001 because much of our natural language is fuzzy in nature, for example, it was “very hot” yesterday; 100 is “much larger” than 10; I “like” watching TV; you drive “too fast,” please keep it “slower;” and he is nottoo “old.”   It is generally accepted that two fundamental fuzzy concepts are: 1 fuzzy set; and 2 fuzzy logic. Fuzzy set uses linguistic variables and membership functions with varying grades to model uncertainty inherent in natural language Zimmermann 2001. Fuzzy relation can be defined as more or less vague relationships between some fixed numbers of objects, and it can formally be treated like fuzzy sets Bandemer and Gottwald 1995. Fuzzy logic is a superset of Boolean conventional logic that has been expanded to handle the concept of partial truth and true values between “completely true” and “completely false” Zimmermann 2001. Fuzzy control can be defined as the application of fuzzy logic Lin and Pang 1994. In general, the design and setting of fuzzy controllers consist of defining three parameters, including: 1 defining the domain for the input and output of linguistic variables for each fuzzy controller; 2 defining the set and the type of membership function for each linguistic value-input of every fuzzy controller. The relations between inputs and outputs of linguistic values have to be provided in the form of fuzzy rules, which represent logical inference; and 3 defining the fuzzy logic operators for each IF-THEN sentence, as a base for final inference Lah et al. 2005.Two Fundamental “Fuzzy Concepts” Applications in Construction Management ResearchTwo fundamental “fuzzy concepts,” including fuzzy set and fuzzy logic, are extensively applied in construction management research. It should be noted that fuzzy set is the basis of fuzzy logic and they are highly associated with each other in that fuzzy logic is a reasoning system that uses fuzzy sets. In fact, both fuzzy set and fuzzy logic are intended to deal with a different type of uncertainty than probability theory, that of vagueness and imprecision. Since these two concepts are increasingly applied to construction management discipline, they are described in the following subsections in greater detail, and their applications in construction management research will be further discussed after the section “Fuzzy Research in the Past.”Fuzzy SetAs mentioned before, fuzzy set theory FST is a branch of modern mathematics that was formulated by Zadeh 1965 to model vagueness intrinsic in human cognitive process. Since then, it has been used to tackle ill-defined and complex problems due to incomplete and imprecise information that characterize the realworld systems Baloi and Price 2003. In fact, Zadeh stated that when the complexity of a system increases, the ability for human beings to make precise but significant statements about their behavior diminishes. This will continue to happen until a threshold is reached beyond which precision and significance becomes mutually exclusive—the principle of incompatibility. Therefore, it follows that modeling complex or ill-defined systems cannot be made precisely. However, FST was not intended to replace probability theory, but rather to provide solutions to problems that lack mathematical rigor inherent to probability theory Baloi and Price 2003. FST is an extension of the classical Boolean or binary logic. The main problem with binary approach is that it fails to convey information effectively, that is, the states between full and nonmembership are ignored but they are very vital. Meanwhile, most real-world systems are extremely complicated and ill defined.   In contrast to binary or dual logic, the essence of fuzziness is that the transition from a membership to nonmembership state of an element of a set is gradual rather than abrupt Baloi and Price 2003. Thus, FST allows a generalization of the classical set concept to model complex and ill-defined systems. The main concepts associated with FST as applied to decision systems are: 1 membership functions; 2 linguistic variable; 3 natural language computation; 4 linguistic approximation; 5 fuzzy set arithmetic operations; 6 set operations; and 7 fuzzy weighted average Zimmermann 2001; Bandemer and Gottwald 1995; Baloi and Price 2003; Jamshidi 1997; Grima 2000; Piegat 2001; Ng et al. 2002; Seo et al. 2004; Zheng and Ng 2005. It is observed that linguistic variable and membership functions are much more widely applied in construction management discipline. And the membership functions applied are always triangular and trapezoidal shapes Fayek and Oduba 2005.Fuzzy LogicFuzzy logic is a superset of Boolean-conventional logic that has been extended to handle the concept of partial truth and truth values between completely true and “completed false” Zadeh 1965; Lin and Pang 1994; Lah et al. 2005. Fuzzy logic should be seen as a data analysis methodology to generalize any specific theory from “crisp” to “continuous.” Fuzzy modeling opens the possibility for straightforward translation of the statements in natural language—verbal formulation of the observed problem— into a fuzzy system. Its functioning is based on mathematical tools. The basic operations of the set theory are intersection, union, and complement extended for the purpose of fuzzy logic.Research MethodologyThe research method used for this paper was to launch a comprehensive review of the related literature from 1996 to 2005.Table 2. Summary of Literature Review on the Applications of Fuzzy Set/Fuzzy Logic and Hybrid Fuzzy Techniques in Construction ManagementResearch over the Last DecadeDecision makingPerformanceEvaluation/ assessmentModelingTotalFuzzy set964423Fuzzy logic12508Hybrid fuzzy techniques564621Total1514131052The selection of literature was mainly based on the top quality journals in construction management and other related fields, which include: 1 Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, ASCE; 2 Journal of Management in Engineering, ASCE; 3 Construction Management and Economics; 4 Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management; 5 International Journal of Project Management; 6 Building Research and Information; 7 Building and Environment; and 8 Benchmarking: An International Journal. In fact, with reference to a research study on journal ranking in construction management conducted by Chau 1997, the first six journals were assessed by respondents to have very high rankings among 22 relevant journal assessed. And the last two journals are widely perceived by academics to be first tier journals in construction related areas. Keywords for “searching” were “fuzzy set,” “fuzzy logic,” “fuzzy control,” and other hybrid fuzzy techniques. These terms were well known of having been used in writing papers on fuzzy techniques. The procedures for retrieving the fuzzy papers are as follows:• The titles of the articles were scanned with the keywords. Altogether, there were 59 articles that contained one of the keywords in their articles’ titles, which are either “genuine fuzzy” papers or closely related papers.• Seven articles were taken out as they were not in the context of construction management.   Metaanalysis is a statistical technique for combining the research findings from independent studies. The essential character of metaanalysis is that it is the statistical analysis of the summary findings of many empirical studies Glass et al. 1981. It can be understood as a form of survey research in which research reports, rather than people, are surveyed. A coding form is developed, a sample or population of research reports is gathered, and each research study is “interviewed” by a coder who reads it carefully and codes the suitable information about its characteristics and quantitative findings Lipsey and Wilson 2001. Since the aim of this research study is to summarize and present a critique of the existing fuzzy literature so as to investigate which major categories fuzzy techniques are strong to analyze and provide a path for future research studies on some areas, content analysis, instead of metaanalysis, was deployed in this research study because it was not aimed at conducting statistical analysis by combining the research findings from a number of independent empirical research studies.  By using the content analysis method in this research study, four major categories of applications have been grouped under two broad fields. The two broad fields are: 1 fuzzy set/fuzzy logic; and 2 hybrid fuzzy techniques. The four major categories are: 1 decision making; 2 performance; 3 evaluation/ assessment; and 4 modeling. The four major classifications of the area of application is mainly based on analyzing the contents of paper with particular reference to paper title, abstract, and keywords using the content analysis technique. The results show that 15 papers can be classified under “decision making;” 14 papers under “performance;” 13 papers under “evaluation/ assessment;” and 10 papers under “modeling.” Content analysis is frequently adopted to determine the major facets of a set of data, by simply counting the number of times an activity happens, or a topic is depicted Fellows and Liu 2008. The first step to conduct content analysis is to identify the materials to be analyzed. The second step is to determine the form of content analysis to be used, which includes qualitative, quantitative, or structural. The choice is dependent on the nature of the research project. The choice of categories will also depend upon the issues to be addressed in the research if they are known. In qualitative content analysis, emphasis is on determining the meaning of the data i.e., grouping data into categories. Quantitative content analysis extends the approach of the qualitative form to generate numerical values of the categorized data frequencies, ratings, ranking, etc. which may be subjected to statistical analyses. Comparisons can be made and hierarchies of categories can be examined Fellows and Liu 2008.“Fuzzy” Research in the PastTable 2 shows that fuzzy research in construction management during the past decade can be divided into two broad fields, encompassing 1 Fuzzy set/fuzzy logic since most applications involve some form of the logic theory and 2 hybrid fuzzy techniques those that combine fuzzy logic with other techniques, such as fuzzy neural network, neurofuzzy, fuzzy reasoning, fuzzy expert systems, fuzzy analysis, and fuzzy clustering, with the applications in four main categories, including 1 decision making; 2 performance; 3 evaluation/assessment; and 4 modeling.“Fuzzy Set/Fuzzy Logic” Applications in Construction Management ResearchTable 3 shows that 31 journal papers have applied fuzzy set/fuzzy logic in construction management research and their areas of application. Grouping these applications into related headings, they can be classified into four categories, namely, 1 decision making; 2 performance; 3 evaluation/assessment; and 4 modeling.Fuzzy Set Applications in Decision-MakingSingh and Tong 2005 stated that contractor selection in a multicriteria environment is largely dependent upon the uncertainty inherent in the nature of construction projects and subjective judgment of decision makers. For this reason, they used a systematic procedure, based on FST, to evaluate the capability of a con-
Table 3. Applications of Fuzzy Set/Fuzzy Logic in Construction Management ResearchNumberJournal nameWritersTheory/conceptField/applicationRelevance/classification1JCEMSingh, D., and Tiong, R.L.K. 2005Fuzzy setsContractor selectionDecision making; performance evaluation2JCEMSeo, S., Aramaki, T., Hwang, Y., and Hanaki, K. 2004FSTEnvironmental sustainable buildingsDecision making; assessment3JCEMTam, C.M., Tong, T.K.L., Leung, A.W.T., and Chiu, G.W.C. 2002bFuzzy setsSite preparationDecision making4JCEMFayek, A. 1998FSTCompetitive bidding strategyDecision making; assessment5CMEWang, R.C., and Liang, T.F. 2004Fuzzy sets theoryProject management decisionsDecision making6CMEZhang, H., and Tam, C.M. 2003Fuzzy setsDynamic resource allocationDecision making7CMELi, H., and Shen, Q. 2002FSTSustainable housingDecision making8CMENg, S.T., Luu, D.T., Chen, SE, and Lam, K.C. 2002FSTProcurement selectioncriteriaDecision making9IJPMWang, W., Hawwash, K.I.M., and Perry, J.G. 1996FSTContract type selectorDecision making10IJPMLin, C.T., and Chen, Y.T. 2004Fuzzy logicBid/no-bid decision makingDecision making11JCEMZheng, D.X.M., and Ng, S.T. 2005Fuzzy sets theoryProject management; risk management; productivityTime and cost performance12JCEMBonnal, P., Gourc, D., and Lacoste, G. 2004Fuzzy setsProject schedulingTime performance13JCEMLorterapong, P., and Moselhi, O. 1996Fuzzy sets theoryProject network analysisTime performance14CMEKishk, M. 2003FSTWhole-life costingCost performance15ECAMZhang, H., Li, H., and Tam, C.M. 2004FST; fuzzy logicActivity durationTime performance16IJPMBaloi, D., and Price, A.D.F. 2003FSTRisk managementPerformance17JCEMOliveros, A.V.O., and Fayek, A.R. 2005Fuzzy logicProject management; activity delay analysisTime performance18JCEMKnight, K., and Fayek, A.R. 2002Fuzzy logicCost control; project managementCost performance; decision making19CMEOkoroh, M.I., and Torrance, V.B. 1999FST ; fuzzy logicSubcontractor selectionModeling20IJPMWei, C.C., and Wang, M.J.J. 2004FSTSelection of ERP systemModeling21IJPMTseng, T.L., Huang, C.C., Chu, H.W., and Gung, R.R. 2004Fuzzy sets theoryMulti-functional project team formationModeling22IJPMLeu, S.S., Chen, A.T., and Yang, C.H. 2001FSTConstruction time-cost trade-offModeling23JCEMChoi, H.H., Cho, H.N., and Seo, J.W. 2004Fuzzy setsRisk assessmentAssessment24JMESánchez, M., Prats, F., Agell, N., and Ormazabal, G. 2005Fuzzy setsValue managementEvaluation; decision making25ECAMKumar, V.S.S., Hanna, A.S., and Adams, T. 2000FSTAssessment of working capital requirementAssessment26IJPMHolt, G.D. 1998FSTContractor selectionEvaluation27JCEMZayed, T.M., and Halpin, D.W. 2004Fuzzy logicProductivityQuantitative assessment performance28JCEMChao, L.C., and Skibniewski, M. 1998Fuzzy logicConstruction technologyEvaluation29CMETah, J.H.M., and Carr, V. 2000Fuzzy logicConstruction project risk assessmentAssessment30ECAMShang, H., Anumba, C.J., Bouchlaghem, D.M., and Miles, J.C. 2005Fuzzy logicIntelligent risk assessment systemAssessment31BIJMa, H., Deng, Z., and Solvang, W.D. 2004Fuzzy logicDistributor benchmarkingBenchmarking/ assessmentNote: JCEMJournal of Construction Engineering and Management, ASCE; CMEConstruction Management and Economics; IJPMInternational Journal of Project Management; JMEJournal of Management in Engineering, ASCE; ECAMEngineering, Construction and Architectural Management; and BIJBenchmarking: An International Journal.
tractor to deliver the project as per the owner’s requirements. The notion of Shapley value was used to determine the global value or relative importance of each criterion in accomplishing the overall objective of the decision-making process. Seo et al. 2004 attempted several alternatives to obtain the sustainable residential buildings based on the acceptable level of environmental impact and socioeconomic characteristics of residential building. However, these criteria are in conflict with each other. Therefore, it is very difficult to assess the sustainable residential buildings. To solve this problem, Seo et al. 2004 adopted a methodology, which is based on FST, to assess a residential building that is intended to assist the decision making for the building planners or industrial practitioners.   Site layout planning can affect productivity and is crucial to project success Tam et al. 2002a. Nevertheless, since construction is heterogeneous in the nature of its organizations, project designs, and time constraints. Site layout planning for each project becomes unique Tam et al. 2002a. Therefore, site layout planning is a typical multiobjective problem because it is affected by many uncertainties and variations. In order to facilitate the decision-making process for these problems, Tam et al. 2002a proposed a nonstructural fuzzy decision support system NSFDSS, which was based on FST. This system integrates both expert’s judgment and computer decision modeling, thus making it suitable for the appraisal of complex construction problems. Fayek 1998 developed a competitive bidding strategy model by using FST to help a company achieve its objectives in bidding. He stated that the use of FST allows assessments to be made in qualitative and approximate terms, which suit the subjective nature of the margin-size decision. He concluded that the competitive bidding strategy model can improve the quality of the decisionmaking process used in setting a margin and can help contractors gain a competitive edge in bidding. Wang and Liang 2004 pointed out that project managers have to handle conflicting goals that govern the use of the resources within organizations in the real world. These conflicting goals are required to be optimized by the project managers in the framework of fuzzy aspiration levels. Wang and Liang 2004 then proposed the multiple fuzzy goals programming model based on fuzzy sets in order to help project managers minimize project total costs, total completion time, and total crashing costs. They believed that the proposed model can provide a systematic decision-making framework, thus enabling a decision maker to interactively modify the fuzzy data and model parameters until a satisfactory solution is generated.   Timely resource allocation is vital to avoid unnecessary waiting time of resources and delay of activities for construction activities. Zhang and Tam 2003 opined that timely resource allocation is a dynamic decision-making process dependent on real-time information during a construction process. Having considered operational and stochastic characteristics of construction operations and the fuzziness of multiple-decision objectives for an appropriate allocation policy, Zhang and Tam 2003 developed a fuzzy dynamic resource allocation based on fuzzy set/ fuzzy logic and the fuzzy decision-making approach. They explained that this model can finally help improve construction productivity by making the best use of resource allocation. Li and Shen 2002 introduced a conceptual approach in developing a decision support tool for sustainable housing, and they illustrated an empirical decision support model for sustainable housing indicators using FST.  Ng et al. 2002 pointed out that many procurement selection models fail to address the fuzziness of selection criteria used for procurement selection. To tackle this problem, they used a modified horizontal approach to establish the fuzzy membership function of procurement selection criteria through an empirical study conducted in Australia. Wang et al. 1996 investigated the possibility of developing a knowledge-based system to assist in choosing an appropriate contract strategy for a specific project. Fuzzy sets have been used for knowledge representation and manipulation and dBASE has been used to manage the database.Fuzzy Logic Applications in Decision MakingLin and Chen 2004 studied bid/no-bid decision making and stated that they were associated with uncertainty and complexity. They adopted a fuzzy logic approach because subjective considerations, such as nature, competition, value of the bid opportunity, resource capabilities, and the reputation of the company are relevant to the bid/no-bid decision. By using this approach, assessments were described subjectively in linguistic terms while screening criteria were weighted by their corresponding level of importance using fuzzy logic and fuzzy values. A practical example proved that this method could provide the analyst with more convincing and reliable results and cost saving for a company.Fuzzy Set Applications in PerformanceZheng and Ng 2005 opined that the duration and cost of each construction activity could change dynamically as a result of many uncertain variables, such as productivity, resource availability, and weather. Project managers have to take these uncertainties into account so as to provide an optimal balance of time and cost, based on their own knowledge and experience. For this reason, FST was applied to model the managers’ behavior in predicting time and cost pertinent to a specific option within a construction activity. Zheng and Ng 2005 believed that by incorporating the concept of fuzzy sets, managers and planners can represent the range of possible time-cost values and their associated degree of belief. They claimed that this model can support decision makers in analyzing their time-cost optimization decision in a more flexible and realistic manner. Bonnal et al. 2004 pointed out that stochastic project-scheduling approaches are used by many project schedulers. However, the axiom associated with the theory of probabilities is always incompatible with decision-making situations. They analyzed that fuzzy project-scheduling approaches are most suited to fuzzy situations, and they proposed a framework, which was based on fuzzy sets, to address the resourceconstrained fuzzy project-scheduling problem. Lorterapong and Moselhi 1996 presented a new network scheduling method based on FST to estimate the durations of construction activities. The proposed method incorporated a number of new techniques that facilitate: 1 the representation of imprecise activity durations; 2 the calculation of scheduling parameters; and 3 the interpretation of the fuzzy results generated.   Zhang et al. 2004 observed that it is always problematic to define uncertain information input for construction-oriented discrete-event simulation. Therefore, they proposed incorporating FST with discrete-event simulation to handle the vagueness, imprecision, and subjectivity in the estimation of activity duration, particularly when insufficient or no sample data are available. Based on an improved activity scanning simulation algorithm, a fuzzy distance ranking measure was used in fuzzy simulation time advancement and event selection for simulation experimentation. Baloi and Price 2003 discussed the core issues of global risk factors’ modeling, assessment, and management. Their preliminary indications showed that FST is a viable technology for modeling, assessing, and managing global risk factors that affect construction cost performance and therefore a fuzzy decision framework for risk management can be successfully developed. Kishk 2004 developed a practical procedure to handle statistically significant data and expert evaluations within the same whole-life costing model calculation. The proposed model was implemented into a computational algorithm using probability distribution function or fuzzy numbers in a manner consistent with the nature of the information in hand.Fuzzy Logic Applications in PerformanceOliveros and Fayek 2005 developed a fuzzy logic model that integrates daily site reporting of activity progress and delays, with a schedule updating and forecasting system for construction project monitoring and control. This model can help with the analysis of the effects of delays on a project’s completion date because the use of fuzzy logic allows linguistic and subjective assessments to be made, and thereby suiting the actual practices commonly used in the construction industry.   Knight and Fayek 2002 used fuzzy logic to predict potential cost overruns on engineering design projects. By doing so, it assists in assessing the amount of possible risk on a project and the likelihood of making a profit on the job. In particular, the research used fuzzy logic to model the relationships between the characteristics of a project and the potential risk events that may occur, and the associated cost overruns caused by combinations of the project characteristics and risk events.Fuzzy Set Applications in Evaluation/AssessmentChoi et al. 2004 presented a risk assessment methodology for underground construction projects, in which they developed a formalized procedure and associated tools to evaluate and manage the risks involved in underground construction. The main tool of the proposed risk assessment methodology is the risk analysis software and this software is built upon an uncertainty model based on fuzzy set. In more detail, the fuzzy-based uncertainty model was designed to consider the uncertainty range that represented the degree of uncertainties involved in both probabilistic parameter estimates and subjective judgments.   Holt 1998 pointed out that the need for judicious construction contractor selection is increasing. For this reason, he reviewed a number of contractor evaluation and selection modeling methods. The methods include: 1 bespoke approaches; 2 multiattribute analysis; 3 multiattribute utility theory; 4 cluster analysis; 5 multiple regression; 6 FST; and 7 multivariate discriminant analysis. The merits and demerits as well as previous and future applications of each methodology were discussed.  Kumar et al. 2000 asserted that the assessment of working capital requirement in construction projects was subjective and based on uncertainty. There is an inherent difficulty in the classical approach to assess the effect of qualitative factors for the evaluation of working capital requirement. Kumar et al. 2000 developed a methodology to incorporate linguistic variables into workable mathematical propositions for the assessment of working capital using FST after considering the uncertainty associated with many of the project resource variables. Sánchez et al. 2005 developed a fuzzy set-based approach for representing and synthesizing information about the various kinds of variables involved in the evaluation of a project’s value in the context of construction in civil engineering. This methodology for summarizing and normalizing values aims at contributing to decisionmaking analysis in the context of multiple-criteria evaluation and group decision making.Fuzzy Logic Applications in Evaluation/AssessmentZayed and Halpin 2004 viewed that in the piling process, both qualitative and quantitative factors have to be considered so as to estimate productivity efficiently. To assess the effect of subjective factors on bored pile construction productivity, Zayed and Halpin 2004 developed a productivity index model mainly based on fuzzy logic to represent the subjective effect in refining productivity assessment using simulation and deterministic techniques. Chao and Skibniewski 1998 presented a fuzzy-logic-based, riskincorporating approach to evaluate new construction technology. Experimental results indicate that the approach can produce a consistent evaluation of the available options, based on a set of user-defined linguistic rules that state the priorities in a given project scenario.   Tah and Carr 2000 used a hierarchical risk breakdown structure representation to develop a formal model for qualitative risk assessment. To do so, a common language for describing risks was first presented, which included terms for quantifying likelihoods and impacts in order to achieve consistent quantification. The relationships between risk factors, risks, and their consequences are represented on cause and effect diagrams through the application of fuzzy logic, and the concepts of fuzzy association and fuzzy composition. Shang et al. 2005 developed an innovative risk assessment approach for distributing project teams. The approach was based on a client and server architecture and used fuzzy logic and web-based technology. It was found that the use of a web-based risk assessment system for distributing project team members had major benefits in terms of use of linguistic terms to express risk assessment, ease of communication, ease of maintenance, and greater consistency.   Ma et al. 2004 mentioned that when an enterprise intends to design its distribution chain, it first needs to assess all possible distributors, and then select the eligible ones to form the design model. In fact, this assessing process can be done by distributor benchmarking by the following three steps. The first step is to identify all factors needed for benchmarking a distributor by a systematic analysis. The second step is to develop an internetbased information acquisition module to get all needed information from possible distributors. The third step is to develop an inference module, based on the combination of fuzzy logic and array-based logic, to benchmark a distributor.Fuzzy Set Applications in ModelingOkoroh and Torrance 1999 developed a subcontractor selection and appointment model for analyzing the subcontractor’s risk elements in construction refurbishment projects. The model is based on the use of FST with the fuzzy set representing the overall weighted average rating of refurbishment contractors’ criterion for the selection of subcontractors. It was believed that the implementation of the model in linguistic terms enables the user to interact with the system in a very friendly manner using natural language expressions.   Wei and Wang 2004 developed a comprehensive framework, which combined objective data obtained both from external professional report and subjective data derived from internal interviews with vendors, to select an appropriate Enterprise Resource Planning ERP project. By doing so, a hierarchical attribute structure was suggested to evaluate the ERP projects systematically. In addition, FST was adopted to aggregate the linguistic evaluation descriptions and weights.   Tseng et al. 2004 defined “a multifunctional team” in the e-world as a group of people from various functional departments or different areas of work responsibility to work together and exchange information through networks. In fact, multifunctional teams are becoming more and more important because organizations often require group cooperation across functional lines and the members may not be in the same location. However, the literature did not provide any analytical solutions for forming multifunctional teams under uncertain information environment. In order to handle the underlying complexities of the multifunctional teams’ formation process, Tseng et al. 2004 developed a methodology based on FST and grey decision theory for the multifunctional team formation. FST was applied to deal with problems involving ambiguities, which were normally confronted in multifunctional teams’ formation practice and formed groups, when there was no clear boundary for relationship between customers’ requirements and project characteristics. Grey decision theory was used to select desired team members through abstract information. It was concluded that the application of the fuzzy and gray approaches demonstrated its capability of forming a good multifunctional team and it was promising to deal with insufficient information at the team forming stage Tseng et al. 2004. It is understandable that construction activity duration is uncertain due to variations in the outside environment, such as weather, site congestion and productivity level. Because of different resource utilization, construction activity duration might need to be adjusted and the project direct cost could also be changed accordingly. Leu et al. 2001 proposed a new optimal construction time-cost trade-off model in which the effects of both uncertain activity duration and time-cost trade-off were taken into consideration. FST was adopted to model the uncertainties of activity durations. A searching technique using genetic algorithm GA was used to search for the optimal construction project time-cost trade-off profiles under different risk levels. This method provided an insight into the optimal balance of time and cost under various risk levels as defined by decision makers.   It should be emphasized that the proposed classification systems are by no means mutually exclusive. Some papers can be grouped in more than one category. For example, the Okoroh and Torrance 1999 paper could also be grouped under the decision making section. However, the writers opined that the focus of this paper is more on model development; therefore, it was put under the grouping of modeling.“Hybrid Fuzzy Techniques” Applications in Construction Management ResearchTable 4 shows that 21 journal papers have applied hybrid fuzzy techniques in construction management research. Their applications can be classified into the same four categories, namely, 1 decision making; 2 performance; 3 evaluation/assessment; and 4 modeling.Hybrid Fuzzy Techniques in Decision MakingLam et al. 2005 conducted a study on construction site layout planning and discovered that the actual closeness of relationships between site facilities ultimately governed the site layout. They had applied two modern mathematical approaches, GA and fuzzy logic, to minimize the uncertainty and vagueness of the collected data and improve the quality of the information. Lam et al. 2001b developed a methodical system for construction project management decision making by using a combination of fuzzy multiple-objective decision-making theory and the fuzzy reasoning technique in order to solve most real-world decision-making problems that combine both qualitative and quantitative concepts. The model developed can be applied to construction project management problems by suggesting an optimal path of corporate cash flow that results in the minimum use of resources. Wong et al. 2000 explained that by incorporating fuzzy analysis into multiattribute utility theory, project selection problems can be dealt with when some project attributes are subject to random variations. The aggregate utility function for an individual project is derived as a fuzzy number or interval which, in turn, yields probabilistic information for stochastic dominance tests. A unique feature of the approach is that it dispenses with the task of selecting probability distributions for aggregate utility function.   Boussabaine and Elhag 1999 stated that fuzzy models are particularly suited to making decisions involving new technologies where uncertainties inherent in the complex situations. Based on an assumption that cash flow at particular valuation stages of a project is ambiguous, they used an innovative fuzzy cash flow analysis to analyze the cash flow curve of projects at any progress period to make sure that it is reasonable. Lam and Runeson 1999 established a decision model for a contracting firm. The model provided a methodical system for construction financial decision making and a way of solving a financial decision problem under qualitative and fuzzy circumstances. The model can be applied to the management of corporate cash flow, thereby facilitating the minimal use of resources. The information provided by the model also allows the planner to eliminate excess use or idleness of resources during the scheduling of a project.Hybrid Fuzzy Techniques in PerformanceFayek and Oduba 2005 applied fuzzy logic and fuzzy expert systems to predict the labor productivity of two common industrial construction activities, that is, rigging pipe and welding pipe, given the realistic constraints of subjective assessments, multiple contributing factors, and limitations on data sets. Liu and Ling 2005 considered that it is difficult to estimate a contractor’s markup because the construction environment is changeable and uncertain. In a study, they constructed a fuzzy logic-based artificial neural network ANN model to assist contractors in making markup decision. By integrating the fuzzy logic inference system, this model provides users with a clear explanation to justify the rationality of the estimated markup output. Marzouk and Moselhi 2004 adopted a two-step fuzzy clustering method to estimate haulers’ travel time, and the method provided a generic tool that could be incorporated in models dedicated for estimating earthmoving production. The developed method used linear regression and fuzzy subtractive clustering in which seven factors affecting haulers’ travel time were first identified and their significance were then quantified using linear regression. Portas and AbouRizk 1997 developed an approach by using a three-layered network with a fuzzy output structure to estimate construction productivity for concrete formwork tasks. It was found that this structure provided the most suitable model since much of the input was subjective. Boussabaine 2001a,b developed an understanding of neurofuzzy concept modeling techniques and demonstrated the power and versatility of neurofuzzy methods when applied to the determination of construction project duration.Table 4. Applications of Hybrid Fuzzy Techniques in Construction Management ResearchNumberJournal nameWritersTheory/conceptField/applicationRelevance/classification1CMELam, K.C., Tang, C.M., and Lee, W.C. 2005GA with fuzzy logicConstruction site layout planningDecision making2CMELam, K.C., So, A.T.P., Ng, T.,Yuen, R.K.K., Lo, S.M., Cheung, S.O., and Yang, H. 2001bFuzzy reasoningConstruction project managementDecision making3CMEWong, E.T.T., Norman, G., and Flanagan, R. 2000Fuzzy analysisProject selectionDecision making4CMEBoussabaine, A.H., and Elhag, T. 1999Fuzzy techniquesCash flow analysisDecision making5CMELam, K.C., and Runeson, G. 1999Fuzzy conceptsFinancial decisionsDecision making6JCEMFayek, A.R., and Oduba, A. 2005Fuzzy expert systems with fuzzy logicConstruction labor productivityProductivity performance7JCEMLiu, M., and Ling, Y.Y. 2005Fuzzy neural networkContractor’s markup estimationCost performance8JCEMMarzouk, M., and Moselhi, O. 2004Fuzzy clusteringTravel timeTime performance9JCEMPortas, J., and AbouRizk, S. 1997Neural networkEstimation of construction productivityProductivity performance10ECAMBoussabaine, A.H. 2001aNeurofuzzyConstruction projects’ durationTime performance11ECAMBoussabaine, A.H. 2001bNeurofuzzyConstruction projects’ durationTime performance12CMELam, K.C., Hu, T., Ng, T., Skitmore, M., and Cheung, S.O. 2001aFuzzy neural networkContractor prequalificationEvaluation13IJPMDzeng, R.J., Wen, K.S. 2005Fuzzy delphi methodProject teaming strategiesEvaluation14IJPMTam, C.M., Tong, T.K.L., Chiu, G.C.W., and Fung, I.W.H. 2002aNonstructural fuzzy decisionSafety managementEvaluation15IJPMKuchta, D. 2001Fuzzy numbersProject risk assessmentAssessment16JCEMCheng, M.Y., and Ko, C.H. 2003Fuzzy neural networkConstruction managementModeling17ECAMTong, T.K.L., and Tam, C.M. 2003Fuzzy sets with GAMulti-skilled labor allocationModeling18IJPMHsieh, T.Y., Lu, S.T., and Tzeng, G.H. 2004Fuzzy analytic hierarchy processPlanning and design tenders selectionModeling19B&ELiu, M., and Ling, Y.Y. 2003Fuzzy neural networkContractors’ markupModeling20BRILi, H. 1997Angular fuzzy setsKBESSuccess factor/ modeling21BIJBouchereau, V., and Rowlands, H. 2000GA with fuzzy logicQuality function deploymentModelingNote: JCEMJournal of Construction Engineering and Management, ASCE; CMEConstruction Management and Economics; ECAMEngineering, Construction and Architectural Management; IJPMInternational Journal of Project Management; B&EBuilding and Environment; BRIBuilding Research and Information; and BIJBenchmarking: An International Journal.Hybrid Fuzzy Techniques in Evaluation/AssessmentDzeng and Wen 2005 proposed an analytical model for the teaming strategies of owners on the inclusion of additional contractors. The proposed model was based on the resource-based theory and the fuzzy Delphi method. It allows the owner to identify critical resources required by the project, to assess the contractors’ capacities, and to identify the resource gaps. Tam et al. 2002a conducted a study to evaluate the safety management systems and prioritized a number of safety improvement measures with the consideration of different decision criteria. To do so, NSFDSS was applied to facilitate the decision-making process for these multiobjective problems. It was found that the modified FDSS is appropriate for the appraisal of complicated construction problem, which allows assessment based on a pair-wise comparison of alternatives using semantic operators, even under the condition that insufficient precise information is available.  Lam et al. 2001a developed a fuzzy neural network FNN model, which amalgamated both the fuzzy set and neural network theories, to improve the objectiveness of contractor prequalification. Through the FNN model, the fuzzy rules as used by the prequalifiers could be identified and the corresponding membership functions could be transformed. Kuchta 2001 proposed a new approach to the criticality of an activity and of the whole project by using the fuzzy critical path method method. This approach considers both the decision maker attitude and the project network structure. The criticality measure obtained may serve as a measure of risk or of the supervision effort needed and can assist to make the decision on whether to accept or reject the project.Hybrid Fuzzy Techniques in ModelingHsieh et al. 2004 adopted a fuzzy multicriteria analysis approach to select planning and design alternatives in public office buildings. The innovative fuzzy analytic hierarchy process method was used to determine the weightings for evaluation criteria among decision makers. On the other hand, the subjectivity and vagueness in the alternative selection process was dealt with by using fuzzy numbers for linguistic terms. By incorporating the decision makers’ attitude toward preference, a crisp overall performance value was obtained for each alternative based on the concept of fuzzy multiple criteria decision making. Multiskilled labor allocation within a defined time frame falls into the class of nonpolynomial hard problems, and solutions can only be derived through repeated trials and errors Tong and Tam 2003. A fuzzy GAs optimization model, which is based on fuzzy sets and GAs, was developed by Tong and Tam 2003 to provide an efficient method to arrive at a “near-optimal” solution.   It is widely accepted that problems associated with the construction industry are complex, full of uncertainty, and vary with environment. Cheng and Ko 2003 stated that fuzzy logic, neural networks, and GAs have been successfully applied in construction management to solve different types of problems over the past decade. Having considered the characteristics and merits of each method, Cheng and Ko 2003 combined the three methods to develop the evolutionary fuzzy neural inference model. It was concluded that this model could be used as a multifarious intelligent decision support system for decision making to solve manifold construction management problems. Liu and Ling 2003 developed the FNN model to help contractors estimate markup percentage to be included in their tenders. This model provides users with a clear explanation to justify the rationality of the estimated markup output. By using this model, it is believed that the difficulties in markup estimation due to its heuristic nature can be overcome.   Quality function deployment is a management tool that provides a visual connective process to help teams focus on the needs of the customers throughout the total development cycle of a product or process Bouchereau and Rowlands 2000. It provides a means for translating customer needs into appropriate technical requirements for each stage of a product/process-development life cycle. It helps develop more customer-oriented higher-quality products. Although there are numerous benefits of using quality function deployment, it is not a simple tool to use. Bouchereau and Rowlands 2000 analyzed that fuzzy logic, ANNs, and the Taguchi method can be combined with quality function deployment to resolve some of its weaknesses, and proposed a synergy between quality function deployment and the three methods and techniques reviewed. Li 1997 investigated vital issues and factors related to the success of a knowledge-based expert system KBES development. He used angular fuzzy sets to quantitatively determine values of the surrogate items and values less than one were regarded as weak items. Deployment of corrective action is then required to enhance the weak items. It was proposed that the identified factors and their surrogate items should bring the attention of KBES developers to a number of vital issues that are crucial to a successful KBES implementation.Implications for the Future Research DirectionsAfter conducting a comprehensive literature review on the applications of fuzzy set/fuzzy logic and hybrid fuzzy techniques in construction management research, some research areas have been identified for further study. First, it is recommended that fuzzy set/fuzzy logic can be incessantly adopted in the previously mentioned four major categories because they can assist in developing models to make decisions and to evaluate the performance in a wide range of areas when analyzing construction problems, which are often viewed as complicated, uncertain, and ill defined. Fuzzy membership functions and linguistic variables, two of the major concepts associated with fuzzy set/fuzzy logic others including natural language computation, linguistic approximation, fuzzy set arithmetic operations, set operations, and fuzzy weighted average Zimmermann 2001; Bandemer and Gottwald 1995; Baloi and Price 2003; Jamshidi 1997; Grima 2000; Piegat 2001; Ng et al. 2002; Seo et al. 2004; Zheng and Ng 2005 can be especially adopted to suit applications to solve construction problems with reference to the aforesaid nature of construction. In fact, fuzzy membership functions enable one to perform quantitative calculations in fuzzy decision making Bharathi-Devi and Sarma 1985 while the concept of linguistic variables serves the purpose of providing a means of approximate characterization of phenomena that are too complex or too ill defined to be amendable to description in conventional quantitative terms Cross and Sudkamp 2002; Niskanen 2004. In addition, it has been observed that hybrid fuzzy techniques, such as neurofuzzy and fuzzy neural networks Boussabaine 2001a,b; Lam et al. 2001a; Cheng and Ko 2003; Liu and Ling 2003, 2005, are increasingly applied in construction management research and they can be more widely adopted in this field because they can better solve some construction problems that fuzzy set/fuzzy logic alone may not best fit. For example, neural networks are strong in pattern recognition and automatic learning while fuzzy set and fuzzy logic are strong in modeling certain uncertainties. Their combination can help to develop models with uncertainty under some forms of pattern. For instance, neurofuzzy systems are able to represent qualitative, vague, and imprecise concepts and to combine the ability of knowledge representation with the learning power of neural networks Boussabaine 2001a. These attributes permit neurofuzzy models to be used in modeling complicated systems and decision processes when the pattern of indeterminacy is the result of inherent variability or vagueness rather than randomness. In fact, neurofuzzy models can assist in developing reliable construction decision support models with ambiguous and imprecise events or facts by representing them in linguistic terms Boussabaine 2001a. Besides, the fuzzy techniques can be applied more extensively to construction technology and information technology disciplines. Examples on areas of investigation included: 1 building thermal dynamic response Skrjanc et al. 2001; 2 sulfate expansion Inan et al. 2007; 3 user acceptance and adaptation Guillemin and Molteni 2002; 4 car-parking guidance Leephakpreeda 2007; 5 thermal conductivity Singh et al. 2007; 6 heating control Gouda et al. 2006; and 7 thermal and illumination control Lah et al. 2005.ConclusionsThis paper has conducted a comprehensive literature review on the application of fuzzy techniques in construction management discipline. Although fuzzy techniques have been increasingly applied in the research area of construction management during the last decade, no paper has attempted to draw up a holistic commentary of the existing fuzzy literature. To fill up this research gap, this paper provides a comprehensive review on the fuzzy literature that has been published in eight selected top quality journals from 1996 to 2005. It has been found that fuzzy research, as adopted in the construction management discipline over the past decade, can be divided into two broad fields, encompassing: 1 fuzzy set/fuzzy logic; and 2 hybrid fuzzy techniques, with their applications in four main categories, including: 1 decision; 2 performance; 3 evaluation/assessment; and 4 modeling. The applications of fuzzy techniques on these categories are very effective and practical because they can help to develop models to make decisions and to evaluate the performance in a wide range of areas when analyzing problems encountered in the construction industry, which are widely regarded as complex, full of uncertainties, and contingent on changing environments. Having conducted a comprehensive overview on the applications of fuzzy techniques in construction management research, it puts forward new directions for fuzzy research and its application in construction management research. It is suggested that future research studies on fuzzy set/fuzzy logic can constantly be applied on the four major categories mentioned previously. Fuzzy membership functions and linguistic variables can be particularly employed to suit applications to tackling construction problems facing the aforesaid nature of construction. In addition, hybrid fuzzy techniques, such as neurofuzzy and fuzzy neural network, can be more broadly adopted because they can better solve some construction problems that fuzzy set/fuzzy logic alone may not best suit. For example, neural networks are strong in pattern recognition and automatic learning while fuzzy set and fuzzy logic are strong in modeling certain uncertainties. Their mixture can assist in developing models with uncertainty under some forms of pattern. For instance, neurofuzzy systems can represent qualitative, vague, and imprecise concepts and combine the ability of knowledge representation with the learning power of neural networks Boussabaine 2001a. These attributes enable neurofuzzy models to be used in modeling complex systems and decision processes when the pattern of indeterminacy is the result of inherent variability or vagueness rather than randomness. Finally, an increasing trend of applying fuzzy techniques in the building science and environmental disciplines is also observed Skrjanc et al. 2001; Guillemin and Molteni 2002; Lah et al. 2005; Gouda et al. 2006; Inan et al. 2007; Leephakpreeda 2007; Singh et al. 2007; it is believed that the application of fuzzy techniques will go beyond the construction management area into these disciplines as well.AcknowledgmentsThe work described in this paper was fully supported by a grant from the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China RGC Project No. PolyU 5158/ 04E. Grateful acknowledgment is made to Dr. Linda C.N. Fan, Department of Building and Real Estate of The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, for her advice during the earlier draft of this paper.ReferencesBaloi, D., and Price, A. D. F. 2003. “Modeling global risk factors affecting construction cost performance.” Int. J. Proj. Manage., 214, 261–269.Bandemer, H., and Gottwald, S. 1995. Fuzzy sets, fuzzy logic, fuzzy methods with application, Wiley, New York.Bharathi-Devi, B., and Sarma, V. V. S. 1985. “Estimation of fuzzy memberships from histograms.” Inf. Sci. (N.Y.), 351, 43–59.Bonnal, P., Gourc, D., and Lacoste, G. 2004. “Where do we stand with fuzzy project scheduling?” J. Constr. Eng. Manage., 1301, 114–123.Bouchereau, V., and Rowlands, H. 2000. “Methods and techniques to help quality function deployment.” Benchmarking: Int. J., 71, 8–20.Boussabaine, A. H. 2001a. “Neuro-fuzzy modeling of construction projects’ duration. I: Principles.” Eng., Constr., Archit. Manage., 82, 104–113.Boussabaine, A. H. 2001b. “Neuro-fuzzy modeling of construction projects’ duration. II: Application.” Eng., Constr., Archit. Manage., 82, 114–129.Boussabaine, A. H., and Elhag, T. 1999. “Applying fuzzy techniques to cash flow analysis.” Constr. Manage. Econom., 176, 746–755.Chao, L. C., and Skibniewski, M. J. 1998. “Fuzzy logic for evaluating new construction technology.” J. Constr. Eng. Manage., 1244, 297– 304.Chau, K. W. 1997. “The ranking of construction management journals.” Constr. Manage. Econom., 154, 387–398.Cheng, M. Y., and Ko, C. H. 2003. “Object-oriented evolutionary fuzzy neural inference system for construction management.” J. Constr. Eng. Manage., 1294, 461–469.Choi, H. H., Cho, H. N., and Seo, J. W. 2004. “Risk assessment methodology for underground construction projects.” J. Constr. Eng. Manage., 1302, 258–272.Cross, V. V., and Sudkamp, T. A. 2002. Similarity and compatibility in fuzzy set theory: Assessment and application, Heidelberg, New York.Dzeng, R. J., and Wen, K. S. 2005. “Evaluating project teaming strategies for construction of Taipei 101 using resource-based theory.” Int. J. Proj. Manage., 236, 483–491.Fayek, A. 1998. “Competitive bidding strategic model and software system for bid preparation.” J. Constr. Eng. Manage., 1241, 1–10.Fayek, A. R., and Oduba, A. 2005. “Predicting industrial construction labour productivity using fuzzy expert systems.” J. Constr. Eng. Manage., 1318, 938–941.Fellows, R., and Liu, A. 1980. Research methods for construction, 3rdEd., Blackwell Science, Oxford, U.K.Glass, G. V., McGaw, B., and Smith, M. L. 1981. Meta-analysis in social research, Sage, London.Gouda, M. M., Danaher, S., and Underwood, C. P. 2006. “Quasiadaptive fuzzy heating control of solar buildings.” Build. Environ., 4112, 1881–1891.Grima, M. A. 2000. Neuro-fuzzy modeling in engineering geology,Balkema, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.Guillemin, A., and Molteni, S. 2002. “An energy-efficient controller for shading devices self-adapting to the user wishes.” Build. Environ., 3711, 1091–1097.Holt, G. D. 1998. “Which contractor selection methodology?” Int. J. Proj. Manage., 163, 153–164.Hsieh, T. Y., Lu, S. T., and Tzeng, G. H. 2004. “Fuzzy MCDM approach for planning and design tenders selection in public office buildings.” Int. J. Proj. Manage., 227, 573–584.Inan, G., Goktepe, A. B., Ramyar, K., and Sezer, A. 2007. “Prediction of sulfate expansion of PC mortar using adaptive neuro-fuzzy methodology.” Build. Environ., 423, 1264–1269.Jamshidi, M. 1997. Large-scale systems: Modeling, control, and fuzzy logic, Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, N.J.Kishk, M. 2004. “Combining various facets of uncertainty in whole-life cost modeling.” Constr. Manage. Econom., 224, 429–435.Knight, K., and Fayek, A. R. 2002. “Use of fuzzy logic for predicting design cost overruns on building projects.” J. Constr. Eng. Manage., 1286, 503–512.Kuchta, D. 2001. “Use of fuzzy numbers in project risk criticality assessment.” Int. J. Proj. Manage., 195, 305–310.Kumar, V. S. S., Hanna, A. S., and Adams, T. 2000. “Assessment of working capital requirements by fuzzy set theory.” Eng., Constr., Archit. Manage., 71, 93–103.Lah, M. T., Zupancic, B., and Krainer, A. 2005. “Fuzzy control for the illumination and temperature comfort in a test chamber.” Build. Environ., 4012, 1626–1637.Lam, K. C., Hu, T., Ng, S. T., Skitmore, M., and Cheung, S. O. 2001a. “A fuzzy neural network approach for contractor prequalification.” Constr. Manage. Econom., 192, 175–188.Lam, K. C., and Runeson, G. 1999. “Modelling financial decisions in construction firms.” Construct. Manag. Econ., 175, 589–602.Lam, K. C., So, A. T. P., Hu, T., Ng, T., Yuen, R. K. K., Lo, S. M., Cheung, S. O., and Yang, H. W. 2001b. “An integration of the fuzzy reasoning technique and the fuzzy optimization method in construction project management decision-making.” Constr. Manage. Econom., 191, 63–76.Lam, K. M., Tang, C. M., and Lee, W. C. 2005. “Application of the entropy technique and genetic algorithms to construction site layout planning of medium-size projects.” Constr. Manage. Econom., 232, 127–145.Leephakpreeda, T. 2007. “Car-parking guidance with fuzzy knowledgebased decision making.” Build. Environ., 422, 803–809.Leu, S. S., Chen, A. T., and Yang, C. H. 2001. “A GA-based fuzzy optimal model for construction time-cost trade off.” Int. J. Proj. Manage., 191, 47–58.Li, H. 1997. “Determinants of knowledge-based expert system success in construction engineering.” Build. Res. Inf., 252, 101–106.Li, H., and Shen, Q. 2002. “Supporting the decision-making process for sustainable housing.” Constr. Manage. Econom., 205, 387–390.Lin, C. T., and Chen, Y. T. 2004. “Bid/no-bid decision-making: A linguistic approach.” Int. J. Proj. Manage., 227, 585–593. Lin, S. S., and Pang, K. F. 1994. Fuzzy theory analysis, The Third WaveCultural Business, Taipei, Taiwan.Lipsey, M. W., and Wilson, D. B. 2001. Practical meta-analysis, Sage, London.Liu, M., and Ling, Y. Y. 2003. “Using fuzzy neural network approach to estimate contractors.” Build. Environ., 3811, 1303–1308.Liu, M., and Ling, Y. Y. 2005. “Modeling a contractor’s markup estimation.” J. Constr. Eng. Manage., 1314, 391–399.Lorterapong, P., and Moselhi, O. 1996. “Project-network analysis using fuzzy sets theory.” J. Constr. Eng. Manage., 1224, 308–318.Ma, H., Deng, Z., and Solvang, W. D. 2004. “An online approach for distributor benchmarking.” Benchmarking: Int. J., 114, 385–402.Marzouk, M., and Moselhi, O. 2004. “Fuzzy clustering model for estimating haulers’ travel time.” J. Constr. Eng. Manage., 1306, 878–886.Ng, S. T., Luu, D. T., Chen, S. E., and Lam, K. C. 2002. “Fuzzy membership functions of procurement selection criteria.” Constr. Manage. Econom., 203, 285–296.Niskanen, V. S. 2004. Soft computing methods in human sciences,Springer, New York.Okoroh, M. I., and Torrance, V. B. 1999. “A model for subcontractor selection in refurbishment projects.” Constr. Manage. Econom., 173, 315–327.Oliveros, A. V. O., and Fayek, A. R. 2005. “Fuzzy logic approach for activity delay analysis and schedule updating.” J. Constr. Eng. Manage., 1311, 42–51.Oxford University. 1993. Oxford dictionary, Oxford University Press,New York.Piegat, A. 2001. Fuzzy modeling and control, Heidelberg, New York.Portas, J., and AbouRizk, S. 1997. “Neural network model for estimating construction productivity.” J. Constr. Eng. Manage., 1234, 399–410.Sánchez, M., Prats, F., Agell, N., and Ormazabal, G. 2005. “Multiplecriteria evaluation for value management in civil engineering.” J. Manage. Eng., 213, 131–137.Seo, S., Aramaki, T., Hwang, Y., and Hanaki, K. 2004. “Fuzzy decisionmaking tool for environmental sustainable buildings.” J. Constr. Eng. Manage., 1303, 415–423.Shang, H. P., Anumba, C. J., Bouchlaghem, D. M., and Miles, J. C. 2005. “An intelligent risk assessment for distributed construction teams.” Eng., Constr., Archit. Manage., 124, 391–409.Singh, D., and Tong, R. L. K. 2005. “A fuzzy decision framework for contractor selection.” J. Constr. Eng. Manage., 1311, 62–69.Singh, T. N., Sinha, S., and Singh, V. K. 2007. “Prediction of thermal conductivity of rock through physico-mechanical properties.” Build. Environ., 421, 146–155.Skrjanc, I., Zupancic, B., Furlan, B., and Krainer, A. 2001. “Theoretical and experimental fuzzy modeling of building thermal dynamic response.” Build. Environ., 369, 1023–1038.Tah, J. H. M., and Carr, V. 2000. “A proposal for construction project risk assessment using fuzzy logic.” Construct. Manag. Econ., 184, 491–500.Tam, C. M., Tong, T. K. L., Chiu, G. C. W., and Fung, I. W. H. 2002a. “Non-structural fuzzy decision support system for evaluation of construction safety management system.” Int. J. Proj. Manage., 204, 303–313.Tam, C. M., Tong, T. K. L., Leung, A. W. T., and Chiu, G. W. C. 2002b. “Site layout planning using nonstructural fuzzy decision support system.” J. Constr. Eng. Manage., 1283, 220–231.Tong, T. K. L., and Tam, C. M. 2003. “Fuzzy optimization of labor allocation by genetic algorithms.” Eng., Constr., Archit. Manage., 102, 146–155.Tseng, B. T. L., Huang, C. C., Chu, H. W., and Cung, R. R. 2004. “Novel approach to multi-functional project team formation.” Int. J. Proj. Manag., 222, 147–159.Wang, R., Hawwash, K. I. M., and Perry, J. G. 1996. “Contract type selector: A KBS for training young engineers.” Int. J. Proj. Manage., 142, 95–102.Wang, R. C., and Liang, T. F. 2004. “Project management decisions with multiple fuzzy goals.” Constr. Manage. Econom., 2210, 1047– 1056.Wei, C. C., and Wang, M. M. J. 2004. “A comprehensive framework for selecting and ERP system.” Int. J. Proj. Manage., 222, 161–169.Wong, E. T., Norman, G., and Flanagan, R. 2000. “A fuzzy stochastic technique for project selection.” Constr. Manage. Econom., 184, 407–414.Zadeh, L. A. 1965. “Fuzzy sets.” Inf. Control., 8, 338–353.Zayed, T. M., and Halpin, D. W. 2004. “Quantitative assessment for piles productivity factors.” J. Constr. Eng. Manage., 1303, 405–414.Zhang, H., Li, H., and Tam, C. M. 2004. “Fuzzy discrete-event simulation for modeling uncertain activity duration.” Eng., Constr., Archit. Manage., 116, 426–437.Zhang, H., and Tam, C. M. 2003. “Fuzzy decision-making for dynamic resource allocation.” Constr. Manage. Econom., 211, 31–41.Zheng, D. X. M., and Ng, T. 2005. “Stochastic time-cost optimization model incorporating fuzzy sets theory and non-replacement.” J. Constr. Eng. Manage., 1312, 176–186.Zimmermann, H. J. 2001. Fuzzy set theory and its application, Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.1242 / JOURNAL OF CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT © ASCE / NOVEMBER 2009 J. Constr. Eng. Manage., 2009, 135(11): 1241-1252 JOURNAL OF CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT © ASCE / NOVEMBER 2009 / 1241 J. Constr. Eng. Manage., 2009, 135(11): 1241-1252 JOURNAL OF CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT © ASCE / NOVEMBER 2009 / 1241 J. Constr. Eng. Manage., 2009, 135(11): 1241-1252 