	Journal of Safety Research 35 (2004) 159–170	www.elsevier.com/locate/jsr	www.nsc.orgCSHM: Web-based safety and health monitoring system for construction managementSai On Cheung*, Kevin K.W. Cheung, Henry C.H. SuenCity University of Hong Kong, Department of Building and Construction, 83 Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong, ChinaReceived 4 November 2002; received in revised form 30 September 2003; accepted 19 November 2003 Available online 7 May 2004Abstract   Introduction: This paper describes a web-based system for monitoring and assessing construction safety and health performance, entitled the Construction Safety and Health Monitoring (CSHM) system. Method: The design and development of CSHM is an integration of internet and database systems, with the intent to create a total automated safety and health management tool. A list of safety and health performance parameters was devised for the management of safety and health in construction. A conceptual framework of the four key components of CSHM is presented: (a) Web-based Interface (templates); (b) Knowledge Base; (c) Output Data; and (d) Benchmark Group. Results: The combined effect of these components results in a system that enables speedy performance assessment of safety and health activities on construction sites. With the CSHM’s built-in functions, important management decisions can theoretically be made and corrective actions can be taken before potential hazards turn into fatal or injurious occupational accidents. Impact on Industry: As such, the CSHM system will accelerate the monitoring and assessing of performance safety and health management tasks. D 2004 National Safety Council and Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.Keywords: Safety and Health Management; Performance Parameters; Performance Assessment; Internet; Database and Knowledge-based Systems  
1. Introduction  Safety and health issues at construction sites have gained industry-wide attention, with an increasing number of centers and commissions in different parts of the world promoting construction safety and health. These organizations include the National Occupational Health and Safety Commission in Australia, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration in the United States, the Health and Safety Commission in the United Kingdom, and the Occupational Safety and Health Council in Hong Kong. Many of these organizations are governmental bodies, serving to promote occupational safety and health at work. Their functions include: promoting safety and health in the community; education and training; consultancy services; research and strategies development; and information dissemination (Health and Safety Commission [HSC], 2002; Occupational Safety and Health Administration [OSHA], 2002; Occupational Safety and Health Council [OSHC], 2002). They strive to ensure safe and healthy construction sites, and their efforts have brought about a change of culture among management and front-line workers: from the traditional ‘‘not-my-business’’ attitude to that of ‘‘everybody’s business’’ (Levitt & Samelson, 1993).  Meanwhile, academics and professionals are extensively researching occupational safety and health problem areas in the construction industry. These studies can be categorized under three main topics: (a) workers’ behaviors and attitudes (Cox & Cox, 1996; Lingard & Rowlinson, 1997); (b) training and workshops (Glendon & McKenna, 1995; Goldenhar, Moran, & Colligan, 2001; Hammer, 1989); and (c) effective management and performance measurement evaluation (Raouf & Dhillon, 1994).* Corresponding author. Tel.: +852-2788-7603; fax: +852-2788-7612. E-mail address: bcsoc@cityu.edu.hk (S.O. Cheung).motivational technique to set out the safety goals of the organization and points out the responsibilities of various0022-4375/$ - see front matter D 2004 National Safety Council and Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.jsr.2003.11.006  With respect to workers’ behaviors and attitudes, the Behavior-Based Safety model (BBS) developed by DePasquale and Geller (1999) has been widely adopted by the industry as the basis for design of safety and health workshops, induction talks, charters, and other safety endeavors. In essence, the model advocates the use of ‘‘goal-setting’’ as a parties accordingly. In addition to bringing about a change of safety culture, previous studies suggested that the BBS model can facilitate interpersonal trust, management support, and active employee participation (Bandura, 1997). While industry training andworkshops are useful tokick-start asafetyand health campaign, its success, to a large degree, depends on a well-planned site safety and health management system (Elbeltagi & Hegazy, 2002). A typical management system generally consists of three limbs: (a) Goal; (b) Process; and (c) Evaluation. It is at the initial stage when the team sets out ‘goals’ as to the project policy in relation to safety and health. The team manager then arranges and sets out details of the policy. Throughout the course of construction, regular meetings are held to evaluate performance results, making sure that the standards are met and performance results are consistent with the overall safety and health policy. If the results show the contrary, immediate corrective actions are taken. Such a management arrangement is instrumental in preventing improper behaviors (e.g., insufficient safety precautions, improper working methods, lack of protective gear) that may lead to serious accidents. For this reason, the importance of a safety and health management system, in particular the measurement and evaluation of performance, cannot be over-emphasized.  Despite the vast volumes of work on safety and health management, most are concerned with the first two limbs: (a) Goal (how to set up project goals) and (b) Process (how to implement a management system). A lot of work has been done on the value and culture of safety management systems (Krause, 1993; Smallwood, 2002). Others turn to the actual implementation of safety and health management systems, such as the opportunities/benefits provided (Ray & Rinzler, 1993) and the barriers encountered (Hinze, 1997; Levitt & Samelson, 1993). There is relatively little work done in relation to the third limb Evaluation; that is, the systematic measurement and assessment of performance (safety and health efforts and results; Geller, 1998). McAfee and Winn (1989) and Cooper, Philips, Sutherland, and Makin (1994) recommended the use of incentives and performance assessment to enhance workplace safety. In their studies, empirical results suggested that systematic measurement and assessment of performance is a useful device to improve safety conditions and reduce accidents. Several possible methods to measure whether the efforts made were effective and whether the performance results have been met to satisfy the safety objectives, include checklists, inspections, attitude surveys, walk-throughs, and document and record analysis (Haupt, 2002).  This paper demonstrates that the process of taking performance measurement can be streamlined through integration with database, web, and expert systems. The paper focuses on the design and development of a prototype of a web-based safety and health monitoring system. In fact, there have been successful applications of web and database technologies in other areas of construction management; for instance, the use of QUALICON in construction quality management (Battikha, 2002), the Partnering Temperature Index in measuring both ‘‘soft’’ and ‘‘hard’’ management issues (Cheung, Suen, & Cheung, submitted for publication), the Risk Register Database in managing project risks (Patterson & Neailey, 2002), and the measuring of cost and quality (Construction Industry Institute [CII], 1989).2. Aims and Objectives  This paper describes the design and development of a prototype web-based safety and health monitoring system for construction projects—Construction Safety and Health Monitoring (CSHM). CSHM can be used as a detector of potential risks and hazards and, more importantly, a warning sign to areas of construction activities that require immediate corrective action. The ability to identify safety and health hazards as early as possible is vital to a project of any size and scale because ‘‘prevention is always better than cure’’ (Nikander & Eloranta, 1997). It is anticipated that CSHM can facilitate speedy safety and health management. However, CSHM is not intended, in any way, to replace the current practice of safety and health management. Instead, it adopted the Safety and Heath Management Model (OSHC, 2002) as the basis for its system design. To make good use of the advent of IT and database technologies, all of the functions of CSHM were designed to be web-based, thus enabling remote access, speedy data collection, retrieval, and documentation. Furthermore, a Knowledge Base was included in the design to enable online expert advice and instructions. In achieving this, the major objectives are as follows: Developing a Web-based Interface for management and assessment of data related to safety and health performance. The interface should enable automated collection, measurement, assessment, storage, and presentation of data; Developing an exclusive Knowledge Base for Safety and Health Management. That is, rules, guidelines, best practices, and so forth, for the prevention and resolution of hazards and unconfirmed practices. These are derived from the practical experience of experts and professionals in the field; Developing a portal to handle key Output Data in a systematic manner. For instance, key and operational data are separated automatically through preset functions such that only data of great importance (i.e., total fatal incidents per month) to senior management are summarized into the executive summary report. Data of less importance, such as those related to operation activities, are stored in the project report; and; Setting up a framework for the design of Benchmark Groups. Organizations or parties interested in knowing more about the industry ‘‘benchmarks’’ or ‘‘standards’’ ina particular area of safety and health management can form a benchmark group. The main purpose is to share and compare the performance results. Benchmarks can be derived from the data collected.  The overall conceptual framework for the development of web-based safety and health monitoring system is illustrated in Fig. 1. In Fig. 1, the four key components of CSHM, including web-based interface, knowledge base, output data, and benchmark group are displayed. It is through their combined effect that enables speedy online performance assessment and management of safety and health activities.  The following sections describe the four key components of CSHM:3. Web-based InterfaceFig. 1. Conceptual Framework of CSHM.  The interface is the gateway to access the vast data contained in the CSHM, which is accessed via the internet domain address. It is also the point where project data are
Fig. 2. Computing Components of CSHM.input, sorted, and stored automatically in accordance to the preset conditions. The interface consists of the Account Login and Data-Entry templates. These are designed to enable speedy and systematic data collection and assessment.3.1. Account Login  By entering the correct username and password, the user can access to the various built-in functions: Contract; Survey; Graph; Account; and Help. These serve to enable the user total control of the data (from reporting to saving, to comparing and assessing the data).3.2. Developing Data-Entry Templates  A sound safety and health management depends on a sound monitoring system, which in turn is subject to thefollowing questions: What data can be used to reflect the current performance?; and How is this data collected and interpreted? These questions are answered by a list of safety and health performance parameters and a systematic approach of handling data. Indeed, developing ‘‘parameters’’ for the measurement and assessment of project performance has been the core subject of effective management. There is a wide range of tools to assist management in measuring and assessing various aspects of project performance, for instance, in financial performance (Sanger, 1998; Ghalayini & Noble, 1996), in partnering relationship (C21, 1999; DERT, 2000), in quality assurance (CII, 1989; Battikha, 2002), and in environmental impact (Environmental Protection Department [EPD], 2002). However, in safety and health management a coherent approach is lacking (as raised in the preceding section). Existing measurement tools tend to rely heavily on ‘‘manual’’ data collection and interpretation; such an approach is losing place in modern society with the wide application of internet and database technologies. An automated and internet-based monitoring system can remove geographic barriers and reduce time in transferring data; in addition, it can enable exchange of massive volumes of information at high speed and at relatively low cost (Deng, Li, Tam, Shen, & Love, 2001). For this reason, CSHM, by making use of the templates (computer-aided data entry forms), is capable of ascertaining current performance figures in an automated manner. The ability to conduct online data collection and transfer saves time and expense. Fig. 2 shows the various computing components of CSHM.3.3. Design of Template  Relevant data (those related to safety and health performance) are input into the template by the project administrator. The content and design of templates depend on the number of performance parameters, which in turn depends on a number of factors, such as the size and scale of projects, the current law and regulations, and the market situations. Hence, like any project performanceTable 1Summary of Key ParametersOperationStatistics–Number of Accidents reported (nonfatalities)–Number of man-days lostMonitoring and Compliance–Safe Work Practices–Tools and Machinery–Personal Protective Equipment–Fire Protection–Electrical Safety–Housekeeping–Hygiene and First Aid Facilities–Chinese Bamboo Scaffolding*RelationEducation, Training, and Campaign–Number of Meetings Held–Number of Toolbox Talk–Number of Participants–Number of Introduction Course–Number of Participants–Promotional ActivitiesInspection and Audit–Number of In-House Inspections–Number of Audits Conducted–Number of Government Inspection/Visit by LD, EPD, FSD, etc.Complaints and Prosecutions–Number of Complaints received from the Staff–Average Time Taken to Close out the complaint (days)–Number of Prosecutions issued by the GovernmentDepartments–Average Time Taken to close out the case (days)* Should be included for projects carried out in Hong Kong and China.  
Fig. 3. Data-Entry Template on Screen.  
measurement tool, the set of performance parameters adopted is unique. In theory, there is no strict rule as to the total number. However, to avoid ‘‘over-measure,’’ prioritization of parameters is needed. In this study, the parameters adopted are mainly derived from two sources: (a) an intensive literature review, followed by (b) interviews with experts in the field.  The safety management guide developed by OSHC (1999) provides a starting point. The guide introduces the basic principle and methodology in the development, implementation, assessment, and maintenance of a safety management system. Under its assessment sections, typical performance parameters to measure effectiveness of safety and health management are provided. In essence, the parameters can be divided into two main themes: statistical and functional. The former is mainly a collection of statistics, such as the number of accidents reported, the number of man-days lost, and so forth. The latter covers reports of evidence of certain non-conformance activities, including reports on safe work practices, tools and machinery, personal protective equipment, and bamboo scaffolding. A total of 10 key parameters were selected by the researchers, and they formed a basis for discussion in the interviews with experts and professionals in the field. In the interviews (10 professionals, including project directors, senior managers, contract administrators, and safety officers), experts were asked to assess the relevance of these 10 parameters to the industry. The 10 parameters include: Number of accidents reported; Number of man days lost; Safe work practices; Personal protective equipment; Fire protection; Electrical safety; Housekeeping; Hygiene; First aid facilities Bamboo Scaffolding  It is worthwhile to mention that the use of bamboo scaffolding is a unique feature in Chinese construction. Because of its wide application in construction projects in Hong Kong and China, particularly in residential projects, it is included as one of the key parameters.  The comments received were mainly positive; however, suggestions were made to include measurements of training, inspection, complaints, and so forth. For education and training, it was suggested that parameters such as number of meetings held, number of tool talks, and number of participants should be included. For inspection, parameters should include number of in-house inspections, number of government inspections, and so forth. For complaints and prosecutions, parameters such as number of complaints received from staff and average time to close out complaints should be recorded. The addition of human-relation-related parameters can be supported by the Behavior-Based Safety model (DePasquale & Geller, 1999), which highlighted the importance of workers’ attitudes and relationships among parties. Therefore, for ease of categorization, the above parameters were divided into two main headings: Operation (include both statistical and functional parameters) and Relation (those parameters that relate to human-relationships, such as those parameters suggested by the interviews).  Table 1 summarizes the key parameters for measurement of safety and health performance. These parameters form the basis for the design and development of the Data-Entry template, as shown in Fig. 3. As parameters can be quantitative or qualitative in nature, methods of measurement vary. For qualitative parameters, measurements are taken by the user giving a ‘‘score’’ for each parameter (qualitative). Further explanation of the scoring method is given in the Data-Entry Process section.4. Knowledge Base  The Knowledge Base contains a summary of expert advice and guidelines that are vital for safety and health management. It plays a supporting role to complement the automated assessment system by providing practical advice to problem areas identified. Upon completion of data entry via the template, the built-in program will automatically highlight those parameters that are underperformed (see scoring system in later section). Expert advice will be given automatically to the underperformed parameters from the Knowledge Base. For instance, data provided in relation to the parameter ‘‘personal protective equipment’’ indicates that workers are not wearing safety belts at work, a warning sign will be displayed right next to that parameter, and by clicking on the warning sign, practical suggestions will be given on the screen (see Fig. 6). The practical suggestions are in fact collected from and based on expert experience and professional practices in the field. In order to develop the Knowledge Base, the research team conducted one-onone interviews with 10 well-recognized experts in the area, with an aim to derive a set of safety and health practices that are useful to resolve common problems.5. Data-Entry Process  Before explaining the Data Output component of CSHM, a brief account on how CSHM works in practice is necessary. As mentioned previously, CSHM is operated through a web-based interface. After successfully entering the contract details, the user can begin the data-entry process. The user can give a ‘‘score’’ by selecting the box within the Rating Box (for parameters under the Operation category, except for those under the Statistics sub-section), under which a Likert Scale of 1 to 10 is available (1-not achieved, 10highly achieved). Further, the user can highlight those areas  
Fig. 4. Graphical Presentation Function—Parameter.Fig. 5. Graphical Presentation Function—Compare.Fig. 6. Executive Report Template on Screen.  
in need of special attention by dragging the ‘‘need attention’’ boxes provided. For other parameters (such as those under the Relation category and under the Statistics subsection), the user simply inputs the score for each parameter into the space provided. By simply clicking on the ‘‘Submit’’ button at the bottom of the template, the completed data-entry will automatically transform into data and stored in the MySQL database. Data stored in the MySQL Database is partitioned according to the project details (i.e., project reference number, month and year, etc.; see Computing Components). The Data-Entry template in an on-line environment can be found in Fig. 3.6. Output Data  The Output Data contains key project data in the form of tables, graphs, and figures. These are the basis for management decision-making and are extremely useful for meeting discussions and presentations.6.1. Dissemination of Collated Data-GraphicalPresentations  CSHM allows the user to monitor the project performance over a certain period through analysis of the scores given to each parameter. Key data can be transformed into charts, curves, and tables within seconds by the MySQL database. In sum, there are three options available for data dissemination: (a) Trend/Movement; (b) Comparing between Projects; and (c) Executive Report.6.1.1. Trend/Movement  Very often, particularly when making important decisions, simply studying performance over a month’s time is not good enough. Before any solid observation can be made, it is necessary to study the performance over a period of three months or more to really understand the movement pattern/trend. Hence, CSHM allows the user to choose the movement/trend of the key parameters (See Fig. 4), including the following: Total number of accidents reported, including fatalities; Total number of fatal accidents; and  Total number of complaints received.  Fig. 4 also shows the trend in the total number of complaints received in a hypothetical project over a period of one year.6.1.2. Comparing between Projects  In addition to the above function, CSHM also allows the user to compare key parameters between projects (see Fig. 5). In Fig. 5, the comparison function is illustrated in the default screen. By studying and comparing the movements of the two curves, management can better understand the differences/similarities in safety and health performance between two projects. As such, management and workers can identify ways for future improvement.6.1.3. Executive Report  The Executive Report is indeed a summary report of the data input, with warning signs attached to the underperforming parameters. An Executive Report template is displayed in Fig. 6. It is worth noting that figures shown in brackets are in fact the ‘‘previous’’ month’s figures. This arrangement helps to facilitate comparison of current and last month’s data. Different from the Data-Entry template, the Executive Report contains a section of Key Parameters (i.e., the total number of fatal accidents), which are the most important figures/data from senior management point of view.7. Potential Use of the CSHM: Benchmarking  Project data can also be used to set up benchmarks for the industry by using the Compare graphical function mentioned previously. Interested groups and organizations can form Benchmark Groups, which are comprised of professionals in the same field. Each Benchmark Group should have its set of goals and objectives in order to devise a set of exclusive ‘‘benchmarks’’ or ‘‘standards’’ by comparing the key output data of different projects. In doing so, both strengths and weaknesses can be identified and ‘‘best practices’’ can be developed to improve the industry standard. Like any organization, a systematic and well-structured framework is needed for the successful implementation of a Benchmark Group. The following are the key ingredients for successful benchmarking: Planning – set out goals; Organizing – break into distinct groups if necessary; Comparing – share and compare data from different projects; Reporting – draw up benchmarks; and Testing – benchmarks are tested in real-life situations8. Computing Components  The advancement in web and database technologies makes the concept of ‘‘online monitoring’’ a reality. Webbased CSHM automates the monitoring process. In addition, the web-based feature of CSHM removes geographic barriers and reduces time between data input and report generation. Furthermore, CSHM enables exchange of massive volumes of information at high speed and at relatively low cost (Deng, Tam, Shen, & Love, 2001). CSHM also reduces human and mathematical errors as data are now directly entered by the user and data collection and calculation is now performed by the computer. In these contexts, CSHM is a total automated monitoring system and its various computing components are explained in this section. The key computing components of CSHM, including PHP Programming Languages, MYSQL Database Backend, computing specification, and technical support requirements are discussed in the following sections.8.1. PHP Programming Languages  To design the Automation suite, the very first task is to select the programming languages. Various programming languages are available, including ASP, C++, PERL, Python and PHP (PHP Hypertext Preprocessor). The Automation suite must provide database support, a userfriendly interface, a security system, and a stable internet connection. PHP, an advanced programming language that facilitates interactive interface and supports powerful database (thus requiring relatively less resources; PHP, 2000), is adopted as the programming language for the Automation suite. To support the PHP in constructing a database for data collection and retrieval, an open source database known as ‘‘MySQL’’ is used. It is one of the most popular open source databases designed for speed, power, and precision in mission critical, heavy load use (MySQL, 2002). Its advantages are fast search and short processing time, and can handle a vast volume of data with robust reliability.8.2. Hardware and Software Specifications for Server  The hardware specification for the server to support CSHM functions depends on a number of factors, such as the size of database, the number of construction projects involved, the number of users’ access in a specific time frame, and so forth. Table 2 summarizes the hardware requirements for the set-up of server. As an example, for a construction project with a 2-year contract period and a total of 30 end-users involved, the size of database should be no less than 2MB. The minimum hardware requirements as listed in Table 2 are capable of handling data of about 1,000 construction contracts. The suggested hardware requirement is designed to handle complex and large-scale construction projects with an extremely large amount of project data.  Since the Automation suite relies on the PHP programming (PHP, 2000) and the MySQL database backend (MySQL, 2002), the web server was designed to be compatible with the PHP and MySQL functions. The software package ‘‘phpMyAdmin’’ (phpMyAdmin, 2002) was used to support the web server as it enables effective management of database (See Table 2).8.3. Initial and Running Costs of the Server  The initial costs vary, depending on the memory capacity of the server required. In fact, all the software requirements mentioned in Table 2 can be obtained from the internet or inTable 2Summary of Computing requirementsFor the ServerHardware Requirements(minimum)Recommended for ComplexConstruction Projects. Intel Celeron 1 GHz. Intel Platinum 4 1.8 GHz. 256 MB SD Ram. 1 GB DDR Ram. 20 GB 7200rpm hard drive. 80 GB 7200rpm hard drive. Generic main board with on-board display card and sound card. Generic main board with on-board display card and sound card. Generic 10/100 PCI LAN Card connected to the Internet. 3Com 10/100 PCI LAN Card connected to the Internet. Generic IDE CD-Rom. Generic IDE CD-Rom. Generic floppy disk drive. Generic floppy disk drive. Generic CRT/LCD Monitor. Generic CRT/LCD Monitor. Generic keyboard and mouse. Generic keyboard and mouse. Optional uninterrupted power supply (UPS) system. Optional uninterrupted power supply (UPS) systemSoftware Requirements. Operation System Red HatLinux 7.3 or above. Programming LanguagePHP 4.2.2 or above. Web Server Apache 1.3.23 or above. Database Server MySQL3.23.52 or above. FTP Server ProFTP 1.2.6 or above. Dynamic Image CreationPackage GD-Library 1.8.4. Secure SocketLayer OpenSSL 0.9.6b or above. Secure Telnet Service OpenSSH 3.1 or aboveFor the End Usersor above. Database management tool for system Administrator— phpMyAdmin 2.3.1 or aboveHardware SpecificationsSoftware Specification. Intel Celeron 1 GHz. 64 MB SD Ram. Microsoft Windows 95, 98, 2000,ME, XP or above. 3.2 GB 7200 rpm Hard Drive. Microsoft Internet Explorer 5.0. Generic main boardor above/Netscape 4.0 or. Generic display card. Generic 10/100 PCI LAN Card or56 Kbps Internal/External Modem. Generic CRT/LCD monitor. Generic keyboard and mouseabove/AOL Browser 5.0 or abovethe Red Hat Linux 7.3 package without charge (Red Hat Linux, 2002). Hence, with the minimum hardware requirements as stated in Table 2, the initial costs for setting up the server should not exceed US$2,000. However, this does not include the set-up charge of the internet connection service. Long-term running costs depend on the number of technical support staff hired and the speed of the internet connection (as a general rule, the faster the speed the higher the connection costs). Generally speaking, the running costs for internet connection should not exceed US$100.8.4. Hardware and Software Specifications for End-user  There is no specific hardware requirement for end-users; a generic personal computer (PC) with internet connection can be used to access the server. Table 2 provides a summary of the hardware and software specification details for end users.8.5. Training for Technical Support Staff  Since the PTI Automation Suite is built on the Linux Server, it is recommended that technical staff should have sound knowledge of the internet, as well as skills in server administration, networking, and system security. Online training on Linux System is available in the Red Hat Homepage (RedHat.com, 2002) and the Red Hat Certified Engineer Program (Red Hat Certified Engineer [RHCE], 2002). The administration tasks of PTI Administration Suite are rather simple and can be managed by people with general computing and internet knowledge. To maintain the Automation suite, it is suggested that the database should be backed up regularly for security purposes. In addition, technical support staff should be prepared to answer questions or problems raised by the end-users.9. Perceived Benefits of CSHM  CSHM is a powerful monitoring and assessment tool. It is capable of reducing a significant amount of time for datacollection and dissemination of collated data. It helps project managers and administrators assess safety and health performance in a timely manner. Performance parameters can be added or reduced to reflect the current industry environment. Such flexibility is essential to cope with the increasing complex and fast-changing social, legal, and political environments. CSHM facilitates automatic, online instant graphical presentation of the performance data of construction enterprises, hence making it possible for construction enterprises to make important decisions (i.e., to take immediate corrective actions in areas that are under-performing) anytime, anywhere. A follow-up evaluation exercise to confirm that the abovementioned benefits continue would be instrumental. This follow-up is now being planned and will be implemented when experience of its use accumulates.10. Concluding Remarks  The developed CSHM streamlines the safety and health performance measurement and assessment process through its web-based interface, database, and expert systems. The web-based interface enables speedy collection of safety and health performance data through the internet, and the collected data are stored in the database and then assessed by the expert system. The final product in this process is the Executive Report, which contains instructions, advice, and graphical presentations of important data all in one sheet. The primary purpose of CSHM is to reduce occupational accidents by directly observing and instantaneously assessing the data submitted in order to take fast and educated preventive and corrective measures. However, CSHM is not intended to replace management involvement in making decisions, particularly those involving human factors. Rather, the web-based monitoring process is to improve efficiency and accuracy and serves as a complement to managerial and leadership competence. The proposed CSHM enables construction management to examine safety and health performance and compare their findings with others within the field through Benchmark Group. Only by comparing performance, weaknesses, and strengths can corrective measures be identified and implemented to improve the overall industry standard. With the well-structured IT networks in most international cities, the proposed CSHM will be a valuable asset to safety and health management in construction.ReferencesBandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: W.H. Freeman and Company.Battikha, M. (2002, March/April). QUALICON: Computer-Based System for Construction Quality Management. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 164–173.Cheung, S., Suen, H., & Cheung, K. (2002). An Automated Partnering Monitoring System—Partnering Temperature Index. Automation in Construction, 13(3), 361–376.Construction Industry Institute (CII). (1989). Measuring the cost of quality in design and construction. Publication, 10–12. Austin, TX: Author.Cooper, M., Philips, R., Sutherland, V., & Makin, P. (1994). Reducing accidents using goal setting and feedback: A field study. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 67, 219–240.Cox, T., & Cox, S. (1996). Safety, system and people. Heinemann:Butterworth.C21. (1999). C21 Construction Contracts (2nd ed.). Department of Public Works and Services, New South Wales, Australia: Author.DePasquale, J.P., & Geller, E.S. (1999). Critical Success Factors for Behaviour-Based Safety—A Study of Twenty Industry-Wide Applications. Journal of Safety Research, 30(4), 237–249.Deng, Z., Li, H., Tam, C., Shen, Q., & Love, P. (2001). An application of Internet-based project management system. Automation in Construction, 10, 239–246.DERT. (2000). KPI Report to the Minister of Construction. United Kingdom: Department of the Environment, Transport and theRegions.Elbeltagi, E. (2002). Incorporating Safety into Construction Site Management. First International Conference on Construction in the 21st Century. 25–26 April 2002, Miami, Florida, USA (pp. 261–266).Environmental Protection Department (EPD). (2002). EPD Homepage—Guidelines, Available at http://www.epd.gov.hk/epd/english/ environmentinhk/Geller, E. (1998). Understanding behavior-based safety: Step-by-step methods to improve your workplace (2nd ed.). Neenah: Keller & Associates Ltd.Ghalayini, A.M., & Noble, J.S. (1996). The basis of performance assessment. International Journal of Operations and Production Management, 16(8), 63–80.Glendon, A., & McKenna, E. (1995). Human Safety and Risk Management. London: Chapman & Hall.Goldenhar, L., Moran, S., & Colligan, M. (2001). Health and safety training in a sample of open-shop construction companies. Journal of Safety Research, 32(2), 237–252.Hammer, W. (1989). Occupational safety management and engineering. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.Haupt, T. (2002). The Performance Approach to construction Worker Safety—A Model for Implementation. First International Conference on Construction in the 21st Century, 25–26 April 2002, Miami, Florida, USA (pp. 269–276).Health and Safety Commission (HSC). (2002). HSE in Action: Safety and   Health Executive, Available at http://www.hse.gov.uk/action/index.htm Hinze, J. (1997). Construction Safety. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc.Krause, T. (1993). Safety and Quality: Two Sides of The Same Coin. Occupional Hazards, April, 47–50.Levitt, R., & Samelson, N. (1993). Construction safety management (2nd ed.). New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.Lingard, H., & Rowlinson, S. (1997). Behavior-Based Safety Management in Hong Kong’s Construction Industry. Journal of Safety Research, 28(4), 243–256.McAfee, R., & Winn, R. (1989). The use of incentives/feedback to enhance work place safety: A critique of the literature. Journal of Safety Research, 20(1), 7–19.MySQL. (2002). MySQL is the world’s most popular Open Source Database, Available at http://www.mysql.comNikander, I., & Eloranta, E. (1997). Preliminary signals and early warnings in industrial investment projects. International Journal of Project Management, 15(6), 371–376.Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). (2002). U.S. Department of Labor—Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Available at http://www.osha.gov/oshinfo/mission.htmlOccupational Safety and Health Council (OSHC). (2002). Homepage available at http://www.oshc.org.hk/Occupational Safety and Health Council (OSHC). (1999). A Guide to Safety Management, Available at http://www.oshc.org.hk/Patterson, F., & Neailey, K. (2002). A Risk Register Database System to aid the management of project risk. International Journal of Project Management, 20, 365–374.PHP. (2000). Professional PHP Programming. United Kingdom: Wrox Press Ltd.PhpMyAdmin. (2002). A Popular Open Source software packages written in PHP for managing MySQL databases under Linux operation system. Available at http://www.phpwizard.net/projects/phpMyAdminRay, M., & Rinzler, A. (1993). The new paradigm in business. New York: Putnam.Raouf, A., & Dhillon, B. (1994). Safety assessment—A quantitative approach, CRC Press.Red Hat Linux. (2002). Red Hat Linux is one of the world’s most popular embedded Linux and Open Source Solutions. Available at http:// www.redhat.comRedHat.com. (2002). An official web site of Red Hat Linux. Available at http://www.redhat.comRed Hat Certified Engineer (RHCE). (2002). RHCE program aims to provide practical training for technical staff managing servers equipped with Red Hat Linux. Available at http://www.redhat.com/training/ rhce/coursesSanger, M. (1998). Supporting the balanced scorecard. Work Study, 47(6), 197–200.Smallwood, J. (2002). The Influence of Health and Safety (H&S) Culture on H&S Performance. Eighteen Annual Conference 2002, September 2–4, Northumbria University, vol. 1 (pp. 217–226).Dr. CHEUNG, S OLLB (Hons), LLM, MBA, PhD FRICS, FHKIS, AAIQS, RPS(QS), MHKIE, MCIOB, MCIArb, RPE(Bldg)Dr. Cheung has lectured at the City University of Hong Kong since 1989. He is an Associate Professor of the Department of Building and Construction. Dr. Cheung is also the Director of the CDRRU- a research unit conducting research in construction management, in particular means to improve the efficiency of the construction industry. Dr. Cheung has published widely in construction contract management, construction law and alternative dispute resolution.Mr. SUEN, Henry C HBArch (Hons), MSc (CPM)Mr. Suen is with the research staff of the CDRRU. His research interests include construction law, partnering, project management and safety. Mr. Suen received his Bachelor degree in Architecture and his Master degree in Construction Project Management from the University of New South Wales and the University of Hong Kong, respectively.Mr. CHEUNG, Kevin K WBSc(Hons) Quantity SurveyingMr. Cheung is the webmaster of the CDRRU. He is responsible for the design, research and development of the CDRRU website. He is also involved in the design of the Integrated Construction Project Performance System. He has expertise in computer and networking engineering and specializes in database management and construction information system.160	S.O. Cheung et al. / Journal of Safety Research 35 (2004) 159–170  	S.O. Cheung et al. / Journal of Safety Research 35 (2004) 159–170	161    