Construction Management and Economics (1993) 11, 475—485
How designs develop: Insights from case studies in building engineering services
s.J. MAcPHERSON, J.R. KELLY and R.S. WEBB
Department of Building Engineering and Surveying, Heriot- Watt University, Edinburgh, UK
Received 27 November 1992; revised 30 April 1993
This study investigates the 'typical' form of design description for heating, ventilating and air conditioning systems in buildings at a point in the design development corresponding to the feasibility stage of the Royal Institute of British Architects' plan of work. Eight case studies yielded rich qualitative data on the form of design description and the process by which those designs evolved. It was found that the designs developed with a fragmentary attention to detail, and did not conform to the top-down approach to design management implied by the plan of work or other prescriptive models of design. Nevertheless, patterns which emerged from the data imply that the design process behind this is not entirely idiosyncratic and unstructured, but points to a strategic approach in the use of detail which was shared by the designers. An empirical model of this strategic process, grounded in the data from the study (a 'grounded theory' model), is developed and the implications for builders of more general models of the design management process are discussed.
Keywords : Design development, design detail, case study, grounded theory.
　
Introduction
0144-6193 	1993 E. & F.N. sponThere have been many studies conducted of the building design process, using methods ranging from longitudinal case studies of live projects to video recording of short intensive design exercises (Lera, 1984). Those studies which examined live projects have tended to focus on the architectural content of building design on small to medium sized buildings, whereas there have been few studies aimed at the contribution of consulting engineers on larger projects with a significant engineering content.
　This study was initiated by a need to find out whether there was a 'typical' form of design description (i.e. drawings and written information) for heating, ventilating and air conditioning (HVAC) systems in offce buildings at a point in the design development corresponding to the feasibility stage of the Royal Institution of British Architects' (R IBA) plan of work. As the study progressed, however, it was extended to other building types and to developing explanations as to why the feasibility stage HVAC designs developed in the way that they did.
　According to the RIBA plan of work (RIBA, 1973) the purpose of developing a project to stage B is to determine the form in which the project is to proceed and to assess the financial and technical feasibility of the proposed design. In order to do this, it is assumed that the HVAC engineer will consider the requirements of the client and appraise the feasibility of alternative HVAC services design solutions in meeting these requirements. Although no specific recommendation is made in the plan of work, it is implied that this will be done at an abstract level of design, with only the most basic level of drawn information, if any.
　This philosophy is reflected in the Building Services Research and Information Association (BSRIA) design manual for building services engineers (BSRIA, 1990) which follows the RIBA plan of work and provides some more detail on the role of the building services engineer in the design team.
Theoretical background
The above mentioned publications are prescriptive documents which relate to the management of the design process. In common with similar documents in other countries (Piper, 1987; Architektenkammer Nordrhein-Westfalen, 1986) and prescriptive models in other fields of design (Phal and Beitz, 1984; VDIRichtlinie 2222 Blatt l, 1973) they assume a 'top-down' hierarchial approach to design development. The problem is first tackled at a general, high level (such as building plan shape) and then at progressively more definitive intermediate levels to a final detailed design. Prescriptive models such as these have been criticized in the past as being unrealistic, because studies of how designers actually work have repeatedly demonstrated that design activity is an iterative process whereby an initial conjectured solution to one part of the design is progressively refined and checked for compatibility with other emerging aspects of the design. Consequently, designers find themselves operating at a variety of levels of detail simultaneously. These criticisms first emerged in the 1970s in relation to architectural design, but more recently similar observations have been made of mechanical engineering design (Ullman et al., 1988; Takeda et al., 1990) which was previously thought to follow the top-down approach more closely.
　Some of these criticisms of prescriptive models are overstated however. Kraus and Mayer (1979) suggested that 'if any conceivable strategy, list of operations or route is permissible in finding a solution, then none can be prescribed as mandatory'. This is certainly true, but it does not disqualify models which are intended merely to structure and not predict the course of design activities. In the general introduction to the RIBA plan of work, it is stated that the sequence of stages listed is only a general guide, and that exact procedures will vary from project to project. The greater the deviation, however, the greater is the risk of the project getting out of control. This seems like common sense advice, and yet repeatedly critics in the design methods field have sought to take the plan of work literally and dismiss it as inadequate because it was not followed exactly in certain instances.
　Taking models at face value in this way and thereby misinterpreting them is termed 'model blindness' by Powell and Russell (1983). They point out that underlying every model of something as complex as the design process are a set of simplifications and assumptions of which the model builders are well aware. There is however a danger of misinterpretation when users and critics of the models bring to bear their own set of assumptions and common sense.
　As Roozenburg and Cross (1991) put it, such models are weak or heuristic, because following them 'requires "sensible" (knowledgeable/informed) interpretation by the designer of the vaguely defined "rules" and terms, and, even if properly applied, success is not guaranteed'. Such models, they say, are not intended to provide recipes, but rather try to 'organise the problem solving behaviour of designers to such an extent that it is more effective and emcient than intuitive, unaided, unsystematic ways of working'.
　Given this theoretical background, this study was embarked upon knowing that it was extremely unlikely that the development of HVAC designs would follow the neat top-down recommendations of the RIBA and BSRIA guides. Nevertheless, questions remained as to what constituted a feasibility stage design; whether there was any consistency across different designers on different buildings; and why the designs developed in the way that they did.
　It was hoped that in spite of the somewhat unstructured approach to the actual practice of design portrayed by the design methods literature, some pattern in the way in which the design process was managed would be discernable. Principally this was because the designers under investigation in this study were part of a multidisciplinary team working on different but interdependent design sub-problems. Although inter-disciplinary interaction was not the focus of this research, it was expected that the greater need to manage the design process in such circumstances would tend to encourage structured, while suppressing idiosyncratic, design practices on the part of individual designers.
Research method
The aims outlined above called for a research strategy which could gather data suffciently rich to provide essentially qualitative insights into design approach, and which is adequately protected against reporting biases by respondents. For example, if simply asked 'Do you carry out an appraisal of a range of HVAC design options before deciding upon which system type to use ? ' it is highly likely that a design engineer will answer in the affrmative, because he wishes to appear conscientious. Moreover, the strategy had to be a flexible one, because due to the exploratory nature of the research, the 'research questions' were not well formulated initially, and would only take shape as information was gathered. Further to this, it was also necessary to generalize to an extent on the results of the study, that is, to be able to make some inferences about the approach of engineers in general to the design of HVAC systems at the feasibility stage according to the RIBA plan of work.
　Issues of methodological validity (such as reporting bias and generalization) have been confronted by many social scientists, and a formal statement of four validity criteria which address these issues has emerged. These are construct validity, internal validity, external validity and reliability (Yin, 1989). Construct validity involves establishing correct operational measures for the concepts being studied. Internal validity requires that where causal relationships are to be inferred from the data gathered, it can be demonstrated that reasonable steps have been taken to verify that these relationships are not spurious. External validity means establishing the extent to which the results of the study can be generalized. Finally, reliability requires that the operations ofthe study (i.e. data gathering and analysis) can be repeated with the same results.
　In view of these methodological requirements and research objectives, it was decided to adopt a multiple case study research strategy, while using a 'grounded theory' approach to analyse the data gathered.
Information gathering
Four consulting practices supplied information on a total of eight building projects from their current or very recent portfolio of work. Of the four practices, two were multi-disciplinary (incorporating architectural, services and structural engineering disciplines), one was both a services and structural consultancy and one was specifically a services consultancy. All of the practices were capable of dealing with large projects with a substantial HVAC content.
　At the request of the researcher, the projects were selected by the HVAC project engineer to represent 'typical' examples of building and HVAC designs at the feasibility stage according to the RIBA plan of work. ('Typical' was taken to mean that the projects were not especially atypical in any way). As the larger research project of which this study formed a part was concerned with offce buildings, four of the buildings selected were offces of varying sizes and one additional project incorporated a substantial offce provision. Three other building types were also investigated, however, to act as a check on the generality of the findings across different building types.
　Table 1 summarizes the development of the design description for each project at the conclusion of the feasibility stage. Space prevents the inclusion here of detailed information on each case project, however fuller narratives which describe the projects in greater depth are available from the authors and an attempt has been made to highlight some points of evidence which provided justification for the findings of the study presented later.
　The use of multiple cases enhances external validity by allowing the inferences drawn from one case to be checked against the others. If the findings are found to match, they are therefore more likely to be valid in a general sense. It should be noted that in case study research, the objective is to generalize the results to theoretical propositions and not to populations. In this sense they are more analogous to experiments, which also aim at analytical generalization, than surveys which aim at statistical generalization and therefore must employ representative sampling techniques.
　In each study, data was collected firstly by detailed inspection of the project files, and in particular those sections of the files which the project engineers had flagged as constituting the feasibility stage. The files contained, in (usually reverse) chronological order, all of the important information on each job which had been committed to paper, such as correspondence with the client and other consultants, minutes of meetings, internal memos, design calculations and drawings. Following this, an unstructured interview was held with the project engineer.
　The inspection of the files was made initially with a view to obtaining a 'snap-shot' of the design at the conclusion of the feasibility stage. By then going back into the file and questioning the project engineer, it was possible to construct explanations (Yin, 1989) for the way in which the design had developed. In an effort to ensure the reliability of the data, the questions concentrated on facts and events, rather than highly subjective interpretations, and used standard courtroom interrogation (e.g. What did you do ? When? Why? Who said what to whom? (Bourgeois and Eisenhardt, 1988)).
　By using more than one source of evidence (project documentation and the recollections of the project engineer) it was possible to improve the construct validity of the research and achieve 'triangulation' (Smith, 1981). That is to say, that while there are obvious and well documented disadvantages in relying solely on the recollections of an individual (Nisbett and Wilson, 1977 ; Watson and Evans, 1975) and while there are equally disadvantages in relying solely on information in files which may have failed to capture more subtle aspects of the design process, the requirement for corroboration on important issues between the two data sources significantly enhances the dependability of the information.
　In this study, it was found that the recollections of the project engineers were supported by the documentation in all major respects. It could be argued that this accuracy might be attributed to the engineers having read over the project files prior to the interview, in which case their recollections may have been 'contaminated' However the engineers had no way ofknowing what sort of questions would be put to them, nor even the aspects of the case which the research would focus upon. Hence it seems implausible that mere priming of this kind could explain the extent of the agreement. It is more likely that the agreement is due to the fact that the questions put to the engineers were more concerned with facts than interpretations (i.e. had good reliability) and that the projects were either current or very recent, and so the events were still fresh in their minds. The agreement was therefore accepted as corroboration.
　

　
Analysis using grounded theory
Initially, this research was approached with few preconceptions. The theoretical background provided by the design research literature created some expectations as to what would be found, for example the variation in design detail. Such ideas were however treated only as 'sensitizing concepts' (Patton, 1980), providing an indication of what to look out for as the study commenced. Hence, this study was not approached from the classical hypothesis-test methodology. Instead, the data from each case was examined and a theoretical account of what happened and why was allowed to emerge from the data itself. These theoretical accounts were then compared across all of the cases to see whether any consistent pattern could be discerned.
　This strategy for analysing data is termed the 'grounded theory' approach (Glaser and Strauss, 1967), because the researcher develops his own local theory to explain his particular observations which is grounded in the data rather than imposed externally from a general theory. The approach is considered appropriate when it is impractical to develop operational hypotheses from general theory either because there is no existing theory or because the theory is too abstract and remote to offer guidance in a specific case (this is the situation in design theory). In this study, the grounded theory strategy also enhanced the internal validity of the research findings because the patterns discerned could be matched across all of the cases (Yin, 1989) and because the patterns themselves emerged from the data, rather than being imposed on the basis of an existing theory. (It is when a compelling theory is being empirically examined using the conventional hypothesis-test research approach that there is a danger of preconceptions shaping the researcher's perception of the data.)
　On a very practical level, grounded theory is also well suited as a method for dealing with qualitative data of the kind gathered from case studies involving unstructured interviews and the examination of documentary sources (Turner, 1981). As Martin and Turner (1986) state, 'typically, these particular kinds of inquiry generate large amounts of data, which accumulate in non-standard and unpredictable formats. The grounded theory approach offers the researcher a strategy for sifting and analysing material of this kind'.
　For a detailed description of the procedure for carrying out a grounded theory study the reader is referred to Turner (1981 ), Glaser (1978) and Martin and Turner (1986).
Patterns which emerged from the data
Identification of the 'feasibility stage' design
One of the first points to emerge from the study was that the consulting engineers found it diffcult to identify the feasibility stage point in the development of a project. When asked to flag the feasibility stage in the project file, a good deal of deliberation was required on the engineers' part, often involving consultations with colleagues. The factor which the engineers initially used as an indication of the feasibility stage was in fact not related to the design description at all, but to the way in which their fees were being paid. Under the traditional form of contract, payment for work done at the first two stages of the RIBA plan of work (termed 'inception' and 'feasibility') is made on a negotiated fixed fee or manhour rate basis. Payment for design work beyond the feasibility stage is normally based on a percentage of the estimated engineering value of the job.
　As the study continued, however, other design related indicators emerged which pointed to the stage of design development, but which had not been obvious to the engineers prior to the study. It unfolded that in most of the cases, the design for all areas of the building was at least as well developed as was indicated by the RIBA plan of work. For example, in the omce projects, although there was little information on the HVAC design of the ancillary and canteen areas, it was at least known what level of servicing would be provided and how much space would be taken up. In the other projects, it was also observed that there was a certain minimum level of information on those areas which had not already been considered in detail. The engineers believed that this level of information did ensure that 'the form in which the project is to proceed' was clear, which is the stated aim of the feasibility stage.
　Hence, it emerged that in practice the RIBA plan of work was being used as a guide to the minimum amount of information which should be available at the feasibility stage. This finding cannot, however, entirely solve the problem of placing the stage of development using the design description alone, because the plan of work is itself open to a degree of interpretation.
Observed variation in level of detail in design descriptions
As expected, there was a variation in the level of detail in the design descriptions for all of the projects. However, there were significant patterns in these variations.
　For the offce buildings in the study (projects 1 to 4 and part of 5) the offce areas were always located on the plans, although there may not yet have been any distinction made between open-plan space and partitioned offces. Layouts for partitioned spaces were never available. Approximate information on the structural grid and the dimensions of structural members was always available for the omce spaces but not necessarily for other parts of the building. Areas had been set aside for service cores (for stairs, lifts, toilets and secondary plant rooms), but their precise location was not always known and there was never any detail on how these spaces would be laid out. Likewise, areas had been set aside for ancillary spaces such as canteens and their associated services, but no further layout information had been worked up.
　Detailed sections on a l : 20 or l : 50 scale had been sketched on all but one of the omce buildings (project 3), which as an exception was explained. These sections showed the arrangement of the HVAC systems in the open-plan offce spaces, and carried information such as approximate duct sizes. There was no such sections for ancillary areas or service cores. In spite of the considerable variation in the level of detail, it could be said that there was a 'typical' form of design description for omce buildings at the feasibility stage.
　The other projects and the factory area of project 5 showed a similar variation in the level of design detail. On the plans, structural information was available in some areas, and the layout of some spaces had been determined, while others had merely been given an aggregate gross floor area allocation. Detailed sections had been sketched for some areas, while there was no similarly detailed information on other parts of the building.
　These findings were at considerable odds with what might be expected according to the RIBA plan of work, and bore further investigation.
The process causing the fragmentary development of detail
Explanations for the variations in level of detail observed in the 'snap-shot' of the feasibility stage design description were constructed by going back into the project files and by questioning the consulting engineers. It emerged that there was also a consistent pattern in the reasons for these variations.
　The patterns which were observed across the eight case studies allowed certain inferences to be drawn as to the process which led to the fragmentary development of detail in the HVAC designs. Here, five general statements are presented which summarize each set of inferences as a theme and form a description of this process.
1. The engineers break problems down into sub-problems
It is clear from the evidence of the case studies that the HVAC engineers broke down the task of designing the services for the buildings by first considering the different functional areas to be accommodated. In the offce projects, there was consistent separation of the HVAC systems for private offces and conference rooms, open-plan/modular areas, circulation areas and canteens. In the other projects there was a similar concern with treating different areas as substantially different problems, although the engineers were always aware that ultimately the HVAC designs for the different areas must be compatible (e.g. to utilize central plant effciently).
2. The engineers identify critical details of the design The step in the design process which followed the breakdown of the functional areas was the identification of those areas which involved critical design details. In the offce building projects investigated, the design of the HVAC system for the open-plan areas was always identified as critical, but the design of the HVAC system for the canteen was not. One engineer's comment was typical: 'We know that we'll put in a constant volume packaged system in the canteen, and maybe some perimeter heating — finned tube type things — at the windows. There's definitely enough room for this and we've left enough plant space adjacent as well so the canteen is no problem.'
　On other occasions, the distinction was made on the basis of a critical case — that is the logical argument 'if it works here then it will work everwhere else'. For example in project 7 the design of clean animal keeping rooms had been critical because of the large air ducts involved (these rooms required high air change rates and low noise levels), however the design of the services for nearby laboratories was not identified as critical. The engineer said 'We knew we'd need to drop the corridor ceiling height right down to fit the ducts in for the animal rooms. Even at that it was a bit of a push. Anyway, because we'd done that there was no question about there being enough space for the ducts going to the labs we just knew it would be okay.'
3. The engineers investigate the effects of critical details
Investigating the effects of critical details often entailed a degree of design work. For example, in some omce buildings, to know if air conditioning as against mechanical ventilation was required, the engineer had to perform heat gain calculations. To then know if suffcient space had been allowed for the required HVAC services, he had to know the generic system type(s) which might be used and so on. He was driven to perform a degree of design work, not for its own sake, but because it was requisite to his investigations.
　In particular, at the beginning of the feasibility stage, it was normal for the engineers to deliberate over a number of possible generic HVAC design solutions for what they believed to be critical areas of the building as envisoned by the architect. The exceptions to this were when the engineer was constrained by the client as in project 3 (the developer had specified the use of one of two common HVAC system types), or when the HVAC application was so specialized that it was believed to automatically imply a generic system type, which was the case in project 7. It should be noted that, in general, the engineers had not been involved in any serious consideration of alternative architectural designs for the building in the first instance. It was generally accepted by the engineers that, on typical projects, HVAC design considerations do not dictate the architectural design, but merely affect it in certain ways — chiefly in connection with space allowances. The exception was project 1, which was undertaken by a multi-disciplinary firm, and where there had been genuine consultation on the impact of building concept on the HVAC requirements.
　This deliberation process involved an initial pro and con type analysis, with no attendant design work as such, to narrow down the range of options. This analysis was conducted by the engineer acting, as he saw it, in the client's interest, by attempting to identify the HVAC system which was 'best' in the circumstances. Sometimes this initial selection process would result in the emergence of a clearly preferred system, but at other times two systems would pass this stage and require a more detailed analysis to facilitate the choice between them. In either case, it was then necessary to go on to test the technical feasibility of the system(s) by ensuring that the HVAC plant for the areas which were believed to be critical could be accommodated within the building, and executing calculations or simulations to test out the expected performance of the systems.
4. The engineers judge whether critical details are suficiently understood
Where the effects of certain aspects of the design were judged to be well enough understood, and so appropriate allowances for space, location etc. could be made in the overall feasibility stage design, the designers did not believe it necessary to go into any further design detail. For example, in all of the projects studied, the space required for plant rooms was calculated from rules of thumb. The engineers were suffciently confident in this information not to feel compelled to start designing the layout of the plant rooms in detail.
　In project 5 the client had a comprehensive briefing and design guide which contained, among other things, some detailed specifications for the HVAC provision in the offces and factory production areas. There is no doubt that the servicing of the production facilities was a critical aspect of the design, but following his investigations of these critical details, the engineer felt that the client's guide was so specific in that regard that no immediate design work was required: 'Everything was in there down to the size of the pipe connections they needed for their machines. We knew we could distribute the services to meet their requirements in the production spaces. The only thing we had to check on was how we'd tie it all together in the main runs from the plant rooms .
　The proviso by the engineer in the above quotation is illustrative of a critical detail within a critical area which was not suffciently understood. The engineers tackled these details by further breaking the design problem down into sub-problems (sub-sub-problems as it were) and then once more going through the process of identifying critical details (sub-details), investigating their effects, and so on. In the cases studied here, these were details such as the distribution of major duct work or the means of accommodating items of plant (e.g. fan coil units). Such details were usually considered important unknowns which had to be investigated because the feasibility of the wider HVAC design depended upon them, and they had an influence on the allowances made in the overall design of the building (e.g. floor to ceiling height, external solar shading). It was these critical and unknown details which were the subject of the larger scale sections though the building and the calculations and simulations performed by the engineers.
5. The engineers execute this process iteratively
As can be seen above, the process of identifying critical details, investigating their effects and so on has begun to execute a second cycle, but on a finer level of detail. In the course of carrying out these more detailed design tasks, however, the engineers could come across yet another set of sub-details which were critical to the larger design problem and so require investigation. For example, in project 4, it was proposed that the supply of air to the open-plan offce-spaces would be upward via grilles in the raised floor. The engineer was concerned that there would be suffcient mixing of the air within the space, however, and that annoying draughts could be avoided. This then forced him to investigate various forms of grille type and the arrangement of these in the floor. In project 8 the engineer would have preferred to locate the chiller plant on the roof of the library building for convenience in terms of pipe runs and other practical matters, but he was concerned about the possible noise problems this could cause. Resolving this question had required obtaining detailed information on the typical sound and vibration levels produced by chillers of the kind he anticipated using, together with details of the building structure anticipated by the architect and structural engineer, and then approaching a specialist acoustics consultant to perform calculations which would predict the likely noise levels in the sensitive areas of the library.
　This iterative process could, in principle, continue ad infinitum, however in practice as a design problem is broken down into smaller and smaller parts, the solution of the smaller design problems becomes progressively more trivial (although the wider scale coordination of these in the context of the overall design becomes more diffcult at the same time). For this reason, there would seem to be a manageable number of iterations before a level is reached at which the designer is satisfied that the effect of that critical detail on the preceding level of detail is suffciently well understood. In the cases studied here, it was estimated that by the feasibility stage the engineers had gone through this iterative process between three and four times at most before stopping. This estimate is very tentative, however, as the distinction between one level of detail and another is arbitrary.
Factors which influenced the development of the process
As was to be expected, the way in which the engineers actually carried out the above steps of breaking the design problem down into sub-problems, identifying critical details and so on was highly complex, and influenced by a myriad of factors. Understanding these methods and influences in depth goes to the heart of the designer's skill, and is the 'holy grail' of descriptive design models. It was not expected, therefore, that a preliminary study such as this would lead to a comprehensive understanding. However, this research was specifically concerned with the evolution of HVAC designs at an early stage, and so within this restricted area it was nevertheless possible to obtain an insight into the more obvious factors which influenced the engineers during the process.
Client requirements
In the projects studied here, it was observed that the way in which the client requirements were presented and the degree of detail accompanying them could have a significant influence on the way in which the engineers identified and dealt with critical details.
　In some instances, the client stipulated certain requirements which the design had to address if it was to be accepted. These requirements could be functional, such as the stringent stipulations on temperature, noise etc. for the animal keeping rooms made by the client in project 7 and the detailed specification of the process equipment for the production spaces in project 5, or they could be of the 'bee in the bonnet' variety as it was termed by one engineer, such as the audio-visual room in project l .
　In project 7, the strict requirements set down immediately identified the design of the HVAC systems for the animal keeping rooms as critical. Moreover, the engineer was not satisfied that enough was known about how to meet these requirements to make allowances in the general design. He therefore proceeded to develop certain aspects of the design of the animal rooms in detail.
　The engineer on project 5 identified the design of the HVAC services in the production spaces as critical because the client was so specific about their requirements. However, the amount and type of detail supplied by the client was such that the engineer felt that the effects of these critical areas was suffciently well understood for that stage in the general design and so no detailed design was necessary.
　In project l, the detail in the design of the audiovisual room was at a stage far in advance of any other part of the building. The engineer stated that he believed the design development to be more in keeping with stage E (detailed design) than stage B of the RIBA plan of work : 'if they [the client] accept the design, and we don't come across any problems ourselves, then I don't think we'll need to do much more on this'. This was in spite of the fact that the area was not considered at all important from a design detail point of view. The engineer explained that the client was particularly enthusiastic about having the audio-visual suite as part of the new headquarters, and therefore an important 'selling point' of the entire design was to address this area as fully as possible: 'This has got more to do with knowing which side our bread is buttered on than designing the services for the building'.
Externally imposed restrictions
Just as client requirements obviously influence design, so too do factors such as the shape and conditions of the site and planning regulations. Restrictions of this kind imposed on the engineers from outside were another influence on the way in which they decided whether or not to proceed to develop a more detailed design description. In project 3, for example, the engineer was concerned about planning restrictions relating to roof mounted plant, and so some detailed discussions with the architect had taken place on how this plant could be concealed. In project 7, the design of fume cupboard exhaust flues had to meet strict regulations to ensure that the gasses would be discharged into the atmosphere without causing a hazard to those in nearby buildings. To do this, the engineer had been forced to decide at a very early stage on the location of the flues on the roof of the building and had then commissioned wind tunnel tests using a scale model of the site.
Sufficient information for detailed design
The requirement to consider detailed aspects of HVAC design at an early stage led to problems on occasion, because sometimes the detailed design required commensurately detailed information from other designers. For example in projects I and 4 computer thermal simulations were carried out to test the proposed HVAC system design in the open-plan omce areas. This simulation required detailed information on the construction of the outside wall such as the amount and type of glazing, the thermal transmittance of opaque panels and so on. However the architects were frequently not in a position to provide that information at such an early stage in the design. Another example of such a problem which applied to all of the cases studied was the design of the structural frame. Once again details such as the likely dimensions of beams and columns (which restrict the space for services) were required before the structural engineer was in a position to produce detailed calculations.
　In these instances, rules of thumb or building regulations were used as 'default' values, but with figures which, as one engineer put it, 'erred on the safe side so that when they do come up with the details later on there are no nasty surprises'. All of the engineers acknowledged that the consequence of this was to overdesign, however they could see no alternative to this approach, and indeed considered it as a form of cost benefit trade off: 'You might end up over-designing — in fact you often do — but you try to build enough flexibility into your system so that you can tweak it down later on. You have to weigh up the cost of over-designing a bit against the cost of making some kind of disastrous mistake in underestimating. It can cost a lot to fix those ! '
Conclusions
It was found the design descriptions studied here exhibited a variation in level of design detail. This is contrary to the implications of the RIBA plan of work and the BSRIA guide for engineering services design, but not unexpected given the theoretical background provided by the design research literature.
　The extent of the variation found in level of detail in the designs was considerable, ranging from the nature of the information required by the plan of work at the feasibility stage (choice of generic HVAC system type) as a minimum, to highly detailed sketches of sections though certain parts of the building and analyses of computer thermal performance simulations. Despite this variation in level of detail, patterns found in the variations indicate that there is a 'typical' form of design description for offce buildings at the feasibility stage. Moreover, similar consistencies in the designs for the other building types considered in the study suggest that the design process behind this is not entirely idiosyncratic, but points to a strategic approach to the use of detail which is shared by the engineers, and which is more directional than the design behaviour hitherto implied by the design methods literature.
　By going back into the project files and questioning the project engineers, certain inferences were drawn as to the process which leads to the fragmentary development of detail in HVAC designs. Central to the process is the notion of the critical detail. In each design, there were certain details which were considered critical if the design was to be technically feasible and/or acceptable to the client. These details might be obvious from the brief and discussions with the client or architect, or considerable experience might be required to recognize them. However they are perceived, it is the need to investigate the effects of these critical details so that appropriate allowances can be made in the overall feasibility stage building design which leads to the apparently premature plunge into detailed HVAC design in selected areas. The process which the engineers go through was described as follows :
1. The engineers break problems down into subproblems
2. The engineers identify critical details of the design
3. The engineers investigate the effects of critical details
4. The engineers judge whether the critical details are suffciently understood
5. The engineers execute this process iteratively
　The process of design involved within stage 3 of this cyclical strategy comprises investigation into the requirement or otherwise for air conditioning or mechanical ventilation, followed by a pro and con type analysis of various generic HVAC system types in certain critical areas, provided that the engineer does not believe that the preferred choice of system type is obvious from the outset. Once one or two candidate systems have been chosen, further design activity might follow in subsequent iterations of the cyclical strategy if the engineer requires more information on certain details such as major duct runs and accommodation for certain items of plant.
　Hence it seems from this study that a hierarchical process of HVAC design proceeding from the conceptual to the specific (similar to that assumed by the RIBA and BSRIA guides) does exist as a technical notion, however it is not uniformly hierarchical in that at any point in time it may be found that some details have been considered while others have not. The attention of the designer is directed through this technical design hierarchy by the strategy above, the principal motivation at the early stages of design being investigative, rather than to complete the design for its own sake. In terms of design completion, it was found that the RIBA plan of work influences the strategy by acting as a guide to the minimum amount of information which should be available at the conclusion of the feasibility stage.
　This design process is relatively self-contained, where the HVAC designer's interaction with other members of the design team is minimal. This sometimes involves making assumptions about aspects of the architectural

Figure 1 A descriptive model of the mode of strategic design behaviour leading to the fragmentary development of detail indesigns.
design which have not yet been decided, indicating that the engineers temporarily treat ill-structured problems as well-structured to facilitate solutions.
　The foregoing suggests a rudimentary descriptive model of the HVAC design process at the early stages, and this model is summarized in Fig. l. The model is a partial one and seeks only to describe the mode of strategic behaviour observed as engineers move through the levels of detail associated with the notional top-down technical design hierarchy. It does not explain the detailed cognitive process of how engineers actually recognize critical details and so on, although the study did highlight some of the more obvious queues influencing the designer, such as the statement of client requirements, restrictions imposed by regulations and so on.
　Accepting their limitations, grounded, partial models such as this are useful to those seeking to develop both descriptive and prescriptive models of a more general type. They may be used to validate descriptive models of the design management process with claims to greater generality, because to be valid these general models must subsume and not conflict with empirically grounded partial models. For those developing prescriptive models, descriptive models, such as the one developed here, graphically demonstrate that there can be 'method in the madness' of designers who abandon the dictates of guides such as the RIBA plan of work. Hence, grounded descriptive models can provide insights into the way in which designers actually work, and assist in the development of prescriptive design management models which take into account the most successful cognitive processes and coping strategies of designers.
Acknowledgements
The larger work of which this research formed a part was supported by research grant GR/F58981 from the Science and Engineering Research Council. The authors would like to thank the engineers from the four consulting firms for their cooperation in providing access to their project files and enduring hours of questioning.
References
Architektenkammer Nordrhein-Westfalen (ed) (1986) Architektenhandbuch 1986/87, Dusseldorf.
Bourgeois, L. J. and Eisenhardt, K.M. (1988) Strategic decision process in high velocity environments, Management Science, 34, 816—35.
BSRIA (1990) Design Briefing Manual. BSRIA Publications. Glaser, B.G. (1978) Theoretical Sensitivity: advances in the methodology of grounded theory. Sociology Press, Mill Valley, California.
Glaser, B.G. and Strauss, A.L. (1967) The Discovery of Grounded Theory. Aldine, Chicago.
Kraus, R.I. and Mayer, J.R. (1979) Design: a case history. In
G.T. Moore (ed) Emerging Methods in Environmental Design and Planning, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Lera, S. (1984) Architects' design strategies: some justifications for current practice. In J.A. Powell, I. Cooper and S. Lera (eds) Designing for Building Utilization. E. & F.N. Spon, London.
Martin, P. Y. and Turner, B.A. (1986) Grounded theory and organisational research Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 22, 141-57.
Nisbett, R.E. and Wilson, T.D. (1977) Telling more than we can know: verbal reports on mental processes, Psychological Review, 84, 231-59.
Patton, Q.M. (1980) Qualitative Evaluation Methods. Sage Publications, Beverly Hills.
Phal, G. and Beitz, W. (1984) Engineering Design. The Design Council, London.
Piper, R.J. (ed) (1987) The Architect's Handbook of Professional Practice. AIA Document B 162, AIA Press.
Powell, J.A. and Russell, B. (1983) Model blindness in design. In A. Pendrith and G. de Zeeuw (eds) Problems of Levels and Boundaries. Princelet Editions.
RIBA (1973) Plan of Workfor Design Team Operations. RIBA
Publications.
Roozenburg, N.F.M. and Cross, N. (1991) Models of the design process: integrating across the disciplines, Design Studies, 12, 215-20.
Smith, H. W. (1981) Strategies of Social Research. PrenticeHall.
Takeda, H., Hamada, S., Tomiyama, T. and Yoshikawa, H. (1990) A cognitive approach to the analysis of design processes. In J.R. Rinderle (ed) Design Theory and Methodology — D TM' 90. American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Chicago, pp. 153—60.
Turner, B.A. (1981) Some practical aspects of qualitative analysis: one way of organising the cognitive processes associated with the generation of grounded theory, Quality and Quantity, 15, 225-47.
Ullman, D.G., Deitterich, T.G. and Stauffer, L.A. (1988) A model of the mechanical design process based on empirical data Al EDAM, 2, 33-52.
VDI-Richtlinie 2222 Blatt I (1973) Konzipieren technischer Produkte. VD1-Verlag, Dusseldorf.
Watson, P.C. and Evans J. (1975) Dual processes in reasoning? Cognition, 3, 141—54.
Yin, R. (1989) Case Study Research : Design and methods. Sage Publications, CA.
476
MacPherson et al.
　
How designs develop	477
　
Copyright 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.
　
Copyright 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.
　

　
Copyright 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.
　
