Construction Management and Economics, 1991, 9, 343—353
Objectives and performance in construction proj ects
S.C. WARD, B. CURTIS and C.B. CHAPMAN
Department of Accounting and Management Science. University of• Southampton, Southampton S09 5NH, UK
This paper considers the problems associated with the identification and use Q/ project-related objectives held by a project-owning, client organization. It is argued that the evaluation of projects, contractors, professionals or procurement methods solely on the extent to which client objectives are achieved is problematic. Difficulties include setting objectives at an appropriate level, allowing for uncertainty and interdependencies between objectives, and measuring the achievemenl Q/objectives. Proper evaluation and improvements in performance require an examination not just Qfproject objectives but also ofthe processes involved in pursuing them.
Keywords: Objectives, project performance. management contracting.
Introduction
The motivation for this papcr was research carried out by the authors into the roles, risks and responsibilities of management contracts in the construction industry. A major concern was the relative rncrits of management contracting over other forms ofconstruction procurement in meeting the requirements of client organizations. This raised the question of how different procurement methods, and by implication the performance of various parties working under different contractual arrangements, could be compared in a mcaningful way.
  A common approach is to cvaluate performance on the extent to which client objectives like cost, time and quality were achieved. This evaluation may be undertaken by the client, other involved parties, or observers in the marketplace. The significancc of such project evaluations is that they influence market perceptions about the effectiveness of particular procurement methods, and the various contracting parties.
  Assessing project performance on the basis ofachievement of client objectives is intuitively appealing, but not without significant practical difficulties. Essentially, these include the problem of measuring goal attainment, allowing for trade-offs, effects due to external factors, and whether goals were set at an appropriate level. One important consequence is that comparing the performance of management contracting and other forms of procurement in terms of the achievement of objectives as measured by criteria like time or cost can be very misleading.
  This paper first looks at the role and nature of client objectives in a project setting. It next discusses the problems involved in setting appropriate objectives or goals for achievement, and the complications introduced by interdependencies between objectives. Subsequent sections consider implications for the evaluation of projects, contracting parties and procurement methods.
0144--6193 /91 $03.00+ .12 	1991 E. & F.N. spon Ltd.
et 
The discussion here focuses on construction projccts and management
However, most — if not all of the problems identified are present to a greatci or lesser extent in any project involving contracting parties.
The role of c*ient objectives
Figure shows the main linkages betweca client objectives, evaluation of project performance and methods for procuring project performance. A! tile client identifies a general set of value-for-money criteria based on experiepc.i) and advice. The client then formulates a vicw of ta.rget levels of attainmcnt or objectives for cach criterion based on the naturc of the project, experience and advicc.

.Copyright.O.2001.w.All.Ri hts.Reseved:.
  Objectives are needed so that appropriate courses of action can be taken for their attainment. This involves the client in:
• choice of a procurement method;
• communicating what is required to contracting parties (including professionals where appropriate); and  periodically guiding the execution of the project by making decisions about process issues.
  While the project is proceeding and on completion of the project, objectives are used to evaluate the success of the project. This involves the client deciding, perhaps subjectively, the extent to which objectives are being or have been met. Objectives may have to be revised in the light of ongoing performance and changing market conditions.
  It follows that behaviour is required from professionals and contractors that is aimed at achieving these objectives. This implies a need for clearly specified client objectives, a method of setting appropriate levels of objectives and procurement systems that facilitate their achievement. As Fig. 1 indicates, the choice of procurement method is influenced by the nature of the project, client objectives and client expectations of the procurement method.
  Client expectations of procurement methods are based on the client's experience with previous projects and associated procurement methods, and professional advice that is in turn based on experience and market perceptions of different procurement methods. This information may be misleading, ill-informed or biased, particularly if it is derived from naive assessments of goal attainment on previous projects.
The nature of client objectives
In general terms, the objectives of a client embarking on a construction project can be stated quite simply. The client wishes to have a structure that looks and functions as intended and that provides an acceptable return for the money expended, These general aims are normally considered to be achievable if attention is concentrated on the three factors of cost, time and quality. These three factors might be usefully subdivided in many situations as follows:
• Cost: initial expected capital cost and subsequent expected maintenance costs. e Time: expected time required for design and construction.
• Quality: expected quality expressed in terms of technical specification, function and appearance (Walker, 1984).
  In addition to the cost, time and quality considerations, an important concern, often based on past experience, is the quality of the relationships with the other participants. Looking back on the conduct of a project, what sticks in the mind is often not so much financial success or early completion, but memories of other people involved and abiding impressions of harmony, goodwill and trust or, conversely, of arguments, distrust and conflict. The client's willingness to pursue a given procurement route to achieve a future project is likely to be strongly influenced by these factors. Other participants, who are looking for further business with the client, should have them very much in mind. Nahapiet and Nahapiet (1985) reported research findings which did not reveal any clear relationship between the satisfaction expressed by clients and project performance assessed in absolute terms, such as

el 
cost per unit of f100i al-ea., or floor arca constructed pc,- unit of time. Other factors such as the smoothness and efliciency with wu;ch the industry fulfi\s thc cl;cnt's needs can play a large part in his or her  of the level of success. Such concerns might bc thought of as a gencral concern to minimize hassle.
  A factor that can be of considerable importance to a client undertaking projcctq in industries that ai-e subject to rapid alid changes is thc case 'Nith which the client can update tbc design and alter the construction -work while it is in prokre„ss. So;ne projects need (o disp\ay or contain the latest tcchü0iogy-. hc buildinp oroccss has a long gcstation period and layouts and fittings appropriately selected at an early stage the design often become outdated. A nev€ tenant need dillérent facilities fin om those already incorporated. New matcrials and styles of appearance and usæuzc may become availablc for consideration, and a client can benefit from h? ving the ability to incorporate these Zit a la_le stage. The client may judge project snc.cess Of, the basis cf having thc most ad varyced and upto„datc features in his project, and this could outweigh all othcr i'dctors in his assessment O? primary importance to a client is thc need 10 adopt a system of prscur:ng thc construction works that allov.ys l-naximurri flexibility to make changes without incurring excessive pcnalties in cost. time and disruption.
  Finally, clients may be concerned about the lcve\ of uncertainty associated w;th cost, time, quality, hasslc and flexibility. Frequently. tilis concern amounts to a wish to minimize unccrtainty of all kinds
Setting objectives
Whatc„e arc set, there is need for realistic levels, ot_herwise conü-actllal parties will not be fully motivated to achieve them. At thc samc ume. it is in thc, interests set objectives that arc challenging. -tiglit but achievable goals ought to act as a control on contractors and professionals. enccurazing them to employ thcir 'bcst endeavours'. Defc-ilcd risk an_alysis can be heloful here. Explicit recognition and ass•eRsrnznt of Tisk_s crmablcs, objective settinc to reflcct cxposure to risks- Thus objectives may be set that arc conditios,va:' on the non-occurrencc 01 specified risks or that include contingcncy allowances, and targets may be agreed if these risks are realizcd.
  The above obsc-: vations ilnply need for verv detailed plamung and explicit recognition throughout the proicct of the achievement of cost, quality, flexibility and ether objectives. However, the qualitative naturc senw value.for-monev critcr:a, such as qua and flexibility, and the uncertainty inhercnt in anv project plan. means that setting fiFeAy judged, cha.llcnéqy ing but achievabkc objcctivcg 'nay bc difficult.
  Relying on market forces to set objectives, e.g. by accepting the lowest fixed price bid. is onc way of fixing a cost objectivc. This is likely to produce a chal i cnging objective for the contractor, but it may not be considered attainable once the project unde\-wov. SeveEü! studies have. concluded that selecting the lowest fixed price bid often means the selection of the contractor who has most underestimated the complexity of the work or who has madc the most mistakes in oricing the work. '[he concept of thc •winner's curse is known.
  Determining a suitablc time-related objective caa also bc diflicult. Clients' expectations of the time nceded for pursuing a particular typc of devclopment are nornnall„y based either on their own cxpcrience of similar works or on advice, received froni soecialist advise r s. -co the cxtent that a ocw project is not the same any predecessor duc to differences in location,
Copyright 0 
ground conditions, access, availability of resources and other environmental factors, project durations will be uncertain. Inexperienced clients arc very dependent upon their professional advisers, who may argue for a short completion time in order to persuade their client to go ahead, or a long completion time to facilitate an easy pace and a claim of time saving on completion.
  Objective setting also requires a clear, unambiguous statement of quality-related objectives in the form or detailed specification of works, and roles and responsibilities of contractors and professionals. Even then, uncertainties inherent in project execution may produce uncertain deviations from thesc objectives, particularly when indirect as well as direct etTects are taken into account. An assessment of the implications of these uncertainties requires further detailed appraisal in the form of risk analysis, This may be impractical or not considered cost-effective for some projects, but may be essential for others.
  In recognition of project uncertainty, objectives may be modified as the project progresses. For example, a progressive refinement of cost targets typically takes place as a project moves through the uncertainty of the exploratory and feasibility stages into detailed design. It is only when the design is complete that a reasonably clear idea of construction costs will emerge. Even so, costs will depend on contractors' pricing levels and any adjustments that have to be made for variations to the design and unforeseen problems.
Interdependencies between objectives
If the level of attainment on each objective is independent of levels attained on other criteria, any client might be expected to seek maximization of quality, assistance and flexibility, and to seek minimization of cost, time, uncertainty and hassle. However, these objectives are interdependent, and potentially incompatible. Therefore, in setting goals for attainment on each objective, trade-offs must be made between levels of attainment on each objective. In particular, it has long been recognized that some degree of trade-off is likely when setting objectives in respect of time, cost and quality, For example, Barnes (1988) represents these three objectives as the vertices of an equilateral triangle, and suggests that the combination of objectives in any particular project can be designated by a point within the triangle, such that an emphasis on any one objective pulls the focus of attention away from onc or both of the others.
  Unfortunately, the problem oftrade-offs is in most cascs complicated by uncertainty about the nature of interdependencies between the diilérent value-for-money criteria. To simplify the problem, consider the three basic criteria of time, cost and quality. Thc potential pairwise eilécts of one upon another are shown in Fig. 2. As Fig. 2 indicates, pair-wise effects do not always work in onc direction, and may depend on the circumstances. A decrease in the time taken to complete a project can cause an increase in total project cost, but it may cause a decrease. Similarly, improvements in quality can mcan an increase or a decrcasc in project time associated with an increase or a decrease in project cost.
  Setting different levels of cost, time or quality objectives can have varying elitcts on the achievement of the other objectives. These effects depend on a variety of situational factors, not least of which are the nature of the project and the behaviour of the contractors and professionals employed. For example, good quality building work is fostcrcd by allowing contractors time to analyse and properly price what is require(L and to conduct the work without excessive hastc and paring or costs.
et 
	TIME	

	COST	
Fig. 2. Interdcpcndencies betwzen time, cost and quaiity.
  Faced with thcse factoa-s; and a concern with several value objectives, clients and othe;parties involved in construction procoyemeni usually adopt a pragmatic approach. For examplc, the client's representative on the building site migh{ accept work of lower performance than specified in the contract where specifications appear excegsively tight, in exchange for work of higher performance in other areas, to secure an overall balance in the terms of exchange. Literal enforcement of the contract terms in each such instance might otherwise lead to disruptions or work stoppages which would not be in the client's best interests (Reve and Levitt, 1984}. Project objectives are often expressed in terms of satisfying target levels of achievement, which are assurrted to be compatible,
  Trade-offs tnay be expressed simply in terms of one objective having clear priority ovcr another, For example, under JCT 87 Management Contract conditions there Is an implied instruction to the management contractor to put completion on time before cost control (Joint Contracts Tribunal, 1987b, D. 5). Any trade-offs of time against other projec{ objectives requirc agreement bctwcen the, „•lient and management contractor on an ad basis.
  [n setting one project-related objective, it is important 10 understand what the implications arc for othcr ebjectivcs- This. enly be achieved hy breaking dmvn the pwa}ect into component aciivitic:€ and building up project goals from plans associaied with the components. Trade offs between clements of cost, timc and need {o be considered in more detailed form: costs ili terms of capital and future maintenance time tea-ms ol' design time and construction time quality in terms ol' tcchilbükl specification- function and appeaatncc; agui flexibility in terms ot'ability to incorporate alicrations bath during and after constrnction.
Project evaluation
As has already bccn sugges{ud, a projccl to be assessed by all involved pawties by extent to which thcir own objecftvcs achicved 01 surpassed. fins goal approach Go performance evaluation has a noni ber 01 significant weaknesses.
Copyright O. 
  One problem is measuring achievement of objectives. For example, achievement of criteria such as flexibility and quality may be very diffcult to measure. How much flexibility is provided may be particularly diffcult to assess if the flexibility provided has not been fully utilized. Quality achievement may be assessable by checking whether the works conform to original plans and specifications, but what of care in construction associated with invisible aspects which may only be assessable in the longer term?
  Another problem is one of complexity and interaction (Mohr, 1982). One aspect is the interdependencies of objectives already discussed in the context of client objectives. If the realization of one goal inhibits attainment of another (and as we have seen even this is unclear), then there is a need to know what trade-offs have taken place to produce the completed project, and how the achievement of one objective is valued in comparison with the achievement of another. It seems that most clients do not explicitly value such trade-offs when setting objectives. It seems even fewer do so at project completion, let alone on a consistent basis over time related to initial assessment.
  A second aspect of complexity and interaction is that performance of the procurement process is affected by the external context, especially by the other activities or projects that parties are engaged in. What it takes to get a job done may depend on what else the parties concerned are trying to accomplish at the same time (Mohr, 1982). Failure to achieve certain objectives, or over-achievement of objectives, may be the result of events beyond the contractors' or professionals' control. For example, extremely adverse or fortuitous weather conditions, or the sudden loss of key personnel, may have a dramatic effect. In principle, such events might be taken into account when comparing project out-turns with original objectives. Alternatively, objectives ought to be revised during the project in the light of such uncontrollable developments. In practice, such revisions do take place but negotiations concerning adjustments may result in inadequate adjustments or compromise.
  A third problem with a goal attainment approach to performance assessment is the problem discussed earlier of setting objectives at an appropriate level. Apparent success in terms of meeting or exceeding an objective may just reflect an easily achieved objective. For example, a large number of road contracts are publicized as finishing well ahead of the advertised completion date. Such apparent success could be due to either exceptional procurement performance motivated by incentive payments, or very generous time allowances (objectives).
Evaluating contractor/professional performance
Problems with the goal attainment approach for assessing overall project performance are even more pronounced when the same approach is used to assess the performance of individual parties to the contract. An associated diffculty is separating out the contribution of any one particular party. To whom, if anyone, is a failure to achieve a given objective, such as a completion date, attributable? Moreover, measuring the relevant outputs from a particular professional or contractor may be diffcult, especially where a service, as opposed to a physical result, is involved.
  A worrying aspect from the perspective of contractors and professionals is client assessment of the reasonableness of the level of profit earned by contractors and professionals. Where this assessment is based on hindsight, there is some likelihood that clients will regard monies paid to contractors to shoulder 'risks that never materialized' as

ct 
excessivc profit. At thc very least, risk premiums are likc\y to be. downwards -with hindsight, unless significant risks have been realized, wh:ti contractor losse viewed as appropuate given thc risk premium charged.  such assessments can have an adverse itnpact. on contractors and orofessionans m respect of future earnings.
  and (1984) suggest that a client's ability to es;aiua.tc professional performance is often depcndent on thc client's technica.l famiharity with the profcsaional se r vices rendered As a result, qualitative aspects of the fclationship hco»een the client and professional a€e oftcn tåkcn as a proxy for the evaluation of technical and economic pcrfomnance, in much the samc wav as the skill and expcrti s;e of n  physician mizhi Fudged by his OF acr bedside manner.
  During thc proctlrement process, each party in thc project coalition is primarily concerned not with the effectiveness ofthc procu(cment process per se, but with ensuring eftéctivcnee,s of its own or*anization. In this bchaviour organizations seem to be adopting an approach to their own effectiveness. which Yuchtnvan and Seashorc (1967' call the 'systeni approach. "[his approach defines organizational effectiveness in terms of the degree to which an organization is successful in acquiring an_d utilizing scarce and valued resources to meet its nceds. In terms of processes, this perspectivc focuses ori the of an organization to exploit its environment. 'l'his ilnplics that an organiznf.iQ(i will most cuectqvc wnen It maximizes its bargaining position, and optimizcs resource procuremcnt by avoiding depletion of its resources or tho stimulation of countervailing forces within the cnvironmcn:. (Yuchtman and Seashore, 1967). 'l'hus, a contractor may scek claims or additional timc, bul must bc careful to avoid what the clicnt or other panics regard as oxcessive claims, les! backlash cf tighter controls and cotmtcr-clairns occurs. Such conccrns aprlv to all membe. s of the project coalition.  the client, ihe need to manage acouisition of resources suggests a further. inc-re political view n . organizational effectiveness: an effecti ve organization is one that is abke to fashion accounts of itself and its activilies m wavs which othey parties find acceptab\e (Gaertncr aud Ramnarayan, 198? With this puspectivc, effectiveness is a characteristic of [elations not outputs. It is negotiated rather than produced. r:'ho.sc subject to controls in the procurelnent process, such as professionals and contractors, direct thciT efforts to looking good a.long conspicuous pcrformance parameters (Levitt and Logcher, 1976). 'l'hus prc» ress data manipu!ated to such an extent that delays and cost over-runs often come as surprises to thc client in the final stages of project work. ypically, what is repoi tcd duriag ihc project is that 'nothing unusual is happening' and that every-thing is in accordance with plans (K reincr. cited in Reve and Levitt. 1984).
  It is important to recognize that. contractors and  like all other marketoriented organizations, attempt to -manage their iruage, and the image portrayed to a client need not correspond to rcalitv. 'l'ho.se, features of their organization and perfonnancc which are visiblc to clients will receive attention u•'ith respect to imagc management... those aspects which are not visible clients wili be ignored.
Evaluating procurement methods
Attempting to evaluate and compare procurement mcq hods on the: basis of goal attainment ts also likely to bc problernatic and potcntially misleading-
As a first step in to comvarc the efficacy of different procuremen2 methods, it is
Copyright-O.20Q4.....All..Ri hts,Rese.vedv
obviously important to be clear what is being compared with what. As one legal adviser remarked: 'clients debating whether or not to embark on a managcment contract may be influenced by their own or others' experience of what was termed a management contract but which was in fact something totally different' (Curtis, 1989). The introduction of the JCT 87 standard conditions will obviously help reduce confusion, but to the extent that variations are employed, the problem will remain.
  A further important requirement for comparison is that apart from the procurement methods being compared, everything else should be equal - like must be compared with like. For example, in order to make a direct comparison between management contracting and its own more conventional form of contract, the Property Services Agency used both forms of contract on prison building projects, where two identical designs were constructed at the same time. Thc prison built using a management contract was completed 15% earlier, was 33% more costly but considered to be of better workmanship (Curtis, 1989). The problem with comparisons of this kind is that other things are never equal. In this case, the designs and perhaps even client objectives were identical, but what of environmental factors, works contractors and other personnel involved on the projects? A serious difficulty in making valid comparisons between procurement methods is the need to distinguish between effects on the procurement process and final outcomes which are due to the procurement method, and those which are due to other factors.
  It follows that opinions and expectations of procurement methods based solely on asscssing project performance at project completion arc misconceived. That such perceptions may be erroneous is even more likely when the practical difficulties of assessing project performance and the influence of individual contributing contractors and professionals are taken into account. In particular, studies which try to draw conclusions about the efficacy of different procurement methods via statistics about project costs and time are bound to be inconclusive.
  For example, in an attempt to evaluate management contracting, Sidwell (1983) compared 10 major management contracts with 32 other projects on construction cost and time. His data suggested that the management contracts were started very quickly compared with the other projects, although construction times for the management contracts were only sometimes shorter than times for the other projects. Three of the management contracts that took longer to construct than many of the other projects appeared to cost significantly more. Such results are interesting, but need to be interpreted with extreme caution. Variations in the type of project and differing cost—time trade-offdecisions are just two factors which make it impossible to draw firm conclusions, even if the data show clear patterns.
  As another example, consider a statement like 'management contracting costs more than other forms of procurement'. Such a statement is difficult if not impossible to prove. A fundamental difficulty is that we cannot tell what would have happened on a given project if a different procurement method had been used. In the case of management contracting, there are indeed factors which might be expected to increase project costs, but there are also factors that are likely to reduce costs. Even if attention is focused on specific additional costs, attributing cause may be difficult. As one management contractor pointed out: how does the client know if extra costs are due to the inefficiencies of the professional team or the management contractor or other causes? (Curtis, 1989). For example, sometimes it is necessary for the management contractor to ask works contractors to accelerate their work The works contractors naturally want extra money, but the client objects to paying as he thinks that the extra costs have arisen due to the inefficiency of his professional team or their
	Coovriaht 	Ri hts 
et al.
contractors. Thus clients have been known to suspend paying fees to their architects when requests for extra money for site works have been submitted (Curtis, 1989). Siliii)arly, increasing construction costs rnay be caused by scarcity and Inarket trends rather than. caused by the use of a particular procurement method per se.
Conclusion
This paper has considered the fundamental role played by client objectives in the procurement process. At the simplest level, objectives are needed so that appropriate courses of action can be taken for their attainment. Performance criteria that clients might consider are cost, time and quality. In addition, clients arc likely to be concerned about expending resources unproductively in the procurement process, flexibility to incorporate changes, and uncertainty about all of the foregoing concerns.
  Setting finely judged, challenging but achievablc objectives that encourage contractors and professionals to employ their 'best endeavours' is difficult. Part of thc problem is the existence of project-related uncertainty and the interdependencies between objectives. Bearing this in mind, it is important for clients to:
1. Set clear objectives.
2. Subject objectives initially set to careful trade-off analysis.
3. Consider objectives carefully when choosing a procurement method
4. Communicate objectives clearly to other involved parties and avoid conflicting guidance to different parties.
5. Ensure that reaction to unexpected events involves proper revision and consideration of client objectives.
  A further shortcoming of assessing effectiveness in terms of goal attainment is that this does not focus attention on identification of shortcomings and strengths in the procuremcrxt process. If the concern is with understanding or seeking to improve effectiveness- then organizations need to be able to specify not just the tasks or objectives they are trying to accomplish, but also the processes that arc involved in accomplishing them.
  Concern with understanding and improving the processes involved in organizational effectivencss has led to the distinguishing of a number of useful perspectives on effectiveness in the organiza lion literature. One particularly helpful pcrspective for present purposes is the system needs approach. Regarding the procurement process as the relevant system (as opposed to focusing on a single party to the process), then the following generic system needs should be addressed (Georgopoulos, 1973)'
l . Adaptation: an ability to adapt favourably to environmental changes.
2, Allocation: an ability to deploy and allocate resources iu the most appropriate manner.
3. Co-ordination: of energies and efforts to the solution of the system's problems and objectives.
4. Integration: of individual members to develop common organizational values and share norms.
5. Tension management: an ability to minimize and resolve tensions and conflicts.
	co ri ht 	Rights 
6. Productivity: an ability to reach and maintain high levels of output, implying an ability to maximize emcient and reliable performance.
7. Integrity: an ability to preserve identity and integrity as a distinct problem-solving system regardless of changes constantly occurring inside and outside the system.
This generic list of needs provides a useful, comprehensive agenda for those seeking to improve the effectiveness of construction procurement processes. Given a procurement process that involves a temporary coalition of individuals from different organizations with potentially conflicting objectives, many of these agenda items are problematic. They do, however, suggest areas for more detailed consideration.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by SERC Grant GR/E 48343.
References
Barnes, N.M.L. (1988). Construction project management. International Journal of Project Management, 6 (2) 69—79.
Curtis, B. (1989). Observations from interviews with senior management in client, professional and contracting organisations. SERC funded research programme on Roles, Responsibilities and Risk in Management Contracts, GR/E 48343, SERC, Swindon.
Gaertner, G.H. and Ramnarayan, S. (1983). Organisational effectiveness: An alternative perspective. Academy of Management Review, 8 (I), 97—107.
Georgopoulos, B.S. (1973). An open system theory model for organisational research. In -Wodern Organisation Theory (edited by A.R. Negandhi), pp. 102—131. Kent State University Press, Ohio. Joint Contracts Tribunal (1987a). Standard Form of Management Contract, 1987 edition.
Joint Contracts Tribunal (1987b). Practice Note MC/I, Management Contracts under the JCT documentation.
Levitt, R.E. and Logcher, R.D. (1976). The human element in project control systems. In Proceedings Qf the Project Management Institute Annual Symposium, Montreal, October.
Mohr, LB. (1982). Explaining Organisationa.l Behaviour. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco.
Nahapiet, J. and Nahapiet, H. (1985). The vexed question of project performance. In The Management of Construction Projects. Chartered Institute of Building, Ascot.
Reve, T. and Levitt, R.E. (1984). Organisation and governance in construction. Project Management, 2 (1), 17-25.
Sidwell, A.C. (1983). An evaluation of management contracting. Construction Management and Economics, I, 47—55.
Walker, A. (1984). Project Management in Construction. Collins, Glasgow.
Yuchtman, E. and Seashore, S.E. (1967). A system resource approach to organisational effectiveness. American Sociological Review, 32, 891—903.
	Co ri ht 	. 	Rights 
	344	Ward al

Objectives and performance in construction projects	345



Co ri ht 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.



Co ri ht 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.

	344	Ward al

Objectives and performance in construction projects	345

2001 . All Ri hts Reseved.

Co ri ht 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.

	344	Ward al

2001 . All Ri hts Reseved.

	352	Ward 

Objectives and performance in construction projects	345

	0 2001 . All 	Reseved,

	0 2001 . All 	Reseved,

	344	Ward al



