Construction Managenzent and Economics, 1991, 9, 327—342
Construction industry clients: A survey of their attributes and project management practices
MICHAEL J. BRESNEN I and CHERYL O. HASLAM 2
I Cardiff Business School, University of Wales College of Cardiff, Aberconway Building, Colum Drive, Cardiff
CFI 3EU and 2 Department d Social Sciences, Loughborough University of Technology, Loughborough LEM 3TU, UK
 The recent growth of interest in the strategic decisions made by clients as to how to organize and manage their projects has not as yet been matched by any extensive and systematic analysis ofclients' attitudes and approaches towards project management. This paper seeks to help redress this imbalance by presenting findingsfrom a survey of 138 client organizations drawn from both the private and public sectors. Focusing upon their experiences on a recently completed, comparatioely large (El million plus) project, the paper examines similarities and differences in the ways in which clients organize and manage their projects and assesses the impact of these practices on project performance. Differences in the type, size and typicality of the projects are also taken into account in the analysis. The main conclusions drawnfrom the data are that client experience has an important impact upon many of the decisions made, that strategic decisions are often internally driven as opposed to prefect-based, that additümal work and inadequate briefing still continue to cause problems during construction, and that there is little direct evidence in favour of alternatives to traditional managerial and contractual arrangements.
Keywords: Clients, project management, contracts, organizations.
Introduction
It is now some considerable time since attention was first directed towards the managerial and contracting practices of construction industry clients in the UK. Evidence from the Wood Report (NEDO, 1975) on public sector clients highlighted how traditional contractual and tendering arrangements dominated public sector building programmes, and advocated that clients extend their range of choice to alternative forms of 'delivery system' (such as design—build contracting, selective tendering and negotiation). In a similar vein, evidence from the private sector suggested that clients were beginning to select from the wider range of alternatives available and were experiencing some greater satisfaction as a result (NEDO, 1974).
  Research at this time also began to suggest that the strategic choices made by clients as to how to organize and manage their projects could have a crucial impact upon subsequent project performance (e.g. Friend et al., 1974). Indeed, considerable attention in recent years has been directed towards analysing clients' strategic choices. * It is now well recognized that
* For a summary of recent research in this area. the reader is referred to the 'Profile of research projects undertaken within the specially promoted programme in construction rnanagement', published by the Department of Construction Management, University of Reading, September 1989 on behalf of the Science and Engineering
Research Council.
0144-6193/91 $03.00+.12 C, 1991 E. & F.N. spon Ltd.
Co ri ht 
Ha-slam
the client's approach towards project management can have substantial positive or adver:ze upon the achievement of project objectives (e.g. NEDO, 1978, 1983).
  However, it is quite clear that such a groundswell of i_nterest has not bccn sufficiently matched by any extensive and systematic analysis of clients' actions, attitudes an_d experiences. Such evidence as does exist is oftcn piecemeal and anecdotal (e.g. Dickinson. 1 979; Mackenzie. 1979; Waters, 1978). More detailed case study evidence exists, but faces tuc question of how typical or representative the findings are (e.g. Stocks and Male, 1983; Bryant et a-LA 1969; 1--•riend et al.. 1974). Broader, based research exists, but tcnds to place emphasis UPOTi a single or small range of variables (e.g. thc form of contract, the degrec of sophistication of the client). *
  Valuable though all this research is in highlighting the potcntial impact of organizational and other factors, it perhaps presents only a limited version of the complete picture. Broader questions such as how and why clients vary in their choice of project management system — and with what consequences have not as yet been fully addressed If. at the end of the day, the aim is to enablc clients to make better informed choiccs in rclation to their requirements, then it is clearly of importance that systematic information be availablc concerning clients' practices, expectations, patterns of involvement and criteria for assesstng project outcomes. Furthermore, it is important that this database rcflect the range of types of client that exist and the types of project that they commonly undertake. To achieve these aims requires categorizing the attributes of client organizations, assessing the manner in which decisions concerning project management are made and related to the type of project, investigating relationships between these variables, and assessing their re.ative impact on project performance and client satisfaction.
Research aims and objectives
The research reported in this paper is derived froi)i a survey of construction industry clients in England and Wales: the aim of which was to chart features of client organizations and. by focusing upon one specific project, to gauge the impact of clients' decisions a_nd prac,ice.q upon construction project performance (for further details of this research, sce Bryman ei al. 1988). Thus both client and project attributes would be fortnulated as a of independent variables whose relationship to performance criteria would be assessed. Particul_ar attention would be directed at client attributes (size, sector, experiencc, management structure„ project characteristics (value. duration, location, type, colnplexity) and decisions made with rcspect to the project (objectives, form of contract, tcndering procedurc, selection of contractors). The aim here be as much to examine the, interrelationships among these variables as to test their effects upon performance. Moreover, a major concern would be to conduct this analysis across a sample of client organizations that reflected the variation found within the industry.
  The client was defined as that organization responsible for the development of the building (i.e. the 'named' organization on the contra.ct). In some instances, this would correspond to the prospective occupiers (e.g. a private company); in others, it would correspond to thosc developing the premises on behalf of current or prospective tenants (e.g- developers, loca}
* Interested readers arc referred to the research undertaken by S.H. -Wearne. V.Bt Torrance7 A.H. Cherns-
	J. Bennett. R.F. Fellows et 	and D. Langford et al. that is summarized in the above rcpcr
authorities). The only clients to be excluded from the sample would be consortia, private home builders, the PSA, the (now-defunct) metropolitan counties and overseas direct Investors.
  In order to examine project management practices, attention would be focused on one large-scale (El million plus) project that clients had recently commissioned and completed. All new building and refurbishment work would be included. Civil and marine engineering projects werc excluded, as were supply contracts and other specialist work (such as landscaping projects).
Methodology
The sample of client organizations was generated using listings from the 'Building/refurbishment' and 'Housing' subsections of the 'Awards' section of the Contract Journal. From a list of applicable projects (entered from September 1984 to February 1986), a subset of projects with an anticipated final completion date that fell 3—12 months prior to the planned interview dates was obtained. This would allow for some significant overrun on the contract programme and also allow interviews to be phased to correspond more or less to a comparable point in time quite soon after each project had finished. (It should be noted that the procedure adopted tended to discriminate slightly against the inclusion of projects with either very short or very long lead times.) Because the client, rather than the project, was the unit of analysis, clients with multiple projects werc counted only once, with the first randomly selected applicable project being chosen. Because the method used was based on a listing of projects, the probability was increased that 'multiple' clients would be selected. Hence, the sample tends to reflect the importance of large-scale and experienced clients within the industry. A target sample of 179 organizations was initially approached. The final sample consisted of 138 clients, representing a response rate of 77%.
  Once cases were selected, a telephone call was made to ascertain who would be best able to act as key informant about the organization and the specific project. This individual was then sent a letter outlining the research and this was followed up by a telephone call to establish willingness to participate. Once access had been agreed, an interview was arranged and a short pre-interview questionnaire was dcspatched to obtain some general information. The interviews were then based on a 40-page structured questionnaire and lasted an average of hours. The nomenclature and role of those interviewed varied considerably, as might be expected. They included managing directors, project managers, building services managers, property/estates managers and chief architects/engineers.
Results
The following sections present the main findings of the survey dealing respectively with clients and their projects, forms of contract used, management structure adopted and objective and subjective assessments of project performance. Because much of the data collected was nominal in form, the analysis relies mainly on frequency distributions and cross-tabulation analysis. Where ordinal data was available, correlational analysis and ttests were conducted as appropriate. For ease of presentation, the contingency tables
Copyright 
Haslar,:;
containing the cross-tabulalion results which are reponed in the tcXt can he feund in t! appendices to this paper.
C:jients and their projects
A summary of the main sample characteristics (alid coknpansons with population statistics from which the sampxe was dfawn) is given in Tables ] and 2 below. As car. be from these figures, the majority of clients were private industrial and commcrcial firms. e.r whom a significant ininority we:c propertv developcrs. Local authorities dcü'åinated the public sector and accounted for most of the housing projects in the sanaplc. In finc with the geographical distributioa of work within thc industry, ncar!y half of all the projec,s wcrc located in London south-cast Englanc% Privatc sector projects were concentrated herc„ alt L public sector work was distributed I-norc evcnly. In tcnns of project completion, 108 (78 0/6) projects had finished up to 13 months before the actual interview. (_)f the rest. 19 (14 0/0) hqd finished cven earlier and only I l (7 0/0) had yet to complete. onscquent,y, any data on performan_cc outcomcs for this lattcr arc anticipated rather than actual
"fab!e l. Client type

	Saillple	Yopulation

Table 2. Project type
	Industrial (factories;ovarehousing)	1 7
Offices 'industry/commcrce)3828Commercial/retail26sousing1 7Education/iraining7(-?ivic86Health64Transport Facilities43

  Clients were asked to indicate their level of experience in handling construction projects by cstimating their current level of annual expenditure on new construction (which can also be taken as an indication of client 'size') and by rating on a 5-point scale the status of the focal project. The responses are given in Table 3.
Table 3. Clients' annual expenditure and project status
Expenditure
Up to {3 m2518First ever1612E3-7 m2417Few before1914	28	20	Regular small number	31	22
	32	23	Large number	60	43
Over {50 m21Entire workload129Missing86Total138100Total138IOO
  Not surprisingly, the two variables were related. For most clients (80%), the projects were not of a novel or unfamiliar type. Those without previous expcrience of a similar type of project (20%) tended to be smaller, less experienced clients. Moreover, the projects being undertaken tended on the whole towards being of 'average' scale or larger than that considered 'typicaP for the client (see Table 4).
Table 4. Size of project
nMuch larger
Larger
Same size
Smaller
Much smaller
Not applicable
Total39
32
37
20
2
8
13828
23
27
14
6
IOO  In part, this distribution no doubt reflects the decision to focus on medium- to large-scale (El million plus) projects. Also, there was a strong tendency for smaller, less experienced clients to be undertaking a larger project than 'normal'. Finally, it should be noted that there were no differences between private and public sector clients with respect to the above variables, except that private sector clients were more likely to be undertaking a major project for the first time.
  In terms of the technical nature of the projects surveyed, most were either new construction or part new/part refurbishment (69 and 16% respectively). Most were also single, one-off projects or part of a multi-phase one-off development (47 and 29% respectively). They were also mainly 'tailormade' projects (80%), speculative developments being confined to the private sector. Only a small proportion (22%) were pure 'greenfield' projects. A larger number (43%) were greenfield in the sense of being built on a redeveloped site or vacant lot '-laslam
on cxisting orerniscs. A further sizeablc  (35%) involved mainly extensions 10 and/or refurbishment of existing premises. Again, -with the exception o! the snecuhtive developments noted above, these variations in tyr pe of project were not affected in any by the private/public sector split,
Forni Q/ contract
l'he thrcc bf(Ydd types o, contractual system used and their distribution across private and public sector are summarizcd in Tablc 5. * 'l*here was a slight tendency for private sector clients to fave;g ø alternat:vcs to the traditional JCT form compared (o pub}ic sector clients. whose reliance on that form was particularly pronounced on housing contracts.
'Table 5. Typc of contractual system used
	33	55	6	94 (68%)

  This preference was studied further by examining the association between contract type on the one hand, and project and client variables on the other. As noted above, a JCT was prevalent on housinu contracts. Morcover, t-tests conducted to compare the r.near. contract values and mean contract 'turnovers' (i.e. valuc per annum) indicateu a significant difference in the use of JCT and alternative rncthods: the latter tcnded to be I-Ised on large;• contracts (see 'Fable 6). However, these •were the only project variables that explained any difference in the use of type of contract: neither the nature of the work (e.gnew/ refurbishment, one-off/phas,e) nor the pc:-ccived 'complexity' of the project had any bearing on the type of contract used.
[able 6.

                    Mean	Mean project	project turnover
  Strongcr associations were fou-n.d with variables measuring client attributes. Although there was no difference in use according to either client experience or familiarity with the typo of work. there was some indication that the choice of method was as much 'internaliy driver,' as 'project-determined'. Most of the cl,ient.s (62%) classified the typc of contract used as either
* Sonle variants of the threc types •were identified practice but subsumed vyilhiti those categoße.s for the purpose further analysis. For instance. design build contracts include deve!op build and design and manage conLracts.
'omcial policy' or 'normal practice'. This was particularly the case among public sector clients. It was also the case, not surprisingly, among larger, more experienced clients for whom construction projects were a more regular occurrence. This tendency to use 'normal practice' is perhaps not unusual, considering that for many clients the projects were fairly typical in terms of both scale and type. Indeed, the larger the project for the client, the more likely was a departure from normal practice; and the more experience of a similar type of project the client had, the more they relied upon their 'normal practice'. At the same time, however, nearly half of the clients who regarded the use of that particular type of contract as 'normal practice' reported no exceptions to its use. Of the remainder, three-quarters varied their practice according to type of project, although only 18% reported that they had no normal practice and approached each project on an ad hoc basis. In other words, the findings here indicate a degree of consistency in choice of contract type despite variation between types of project encountered. It seems that it is as much a departure from what is considered 'typical' or 'normal' that prompts clients to eschew normal practice, as it is characteristics of the particular project per se. As will be seen below, this emphasis on standard practice proves even stronger when one considers the internal management organization they employ to manage projects.
Client project management
Three main generic types of project management organization were identified among the sample of clients (see Table 7). The category 'PM model' refers to situations where an inhouse project management team was involved usually led by project managers, property managers, building managers, estates managers and the like. The category 'in-house team', by contrast, refers to a traditional architect-led system. The 'MD/consultant' category refers to those cases where direct control was exerted by the chief executive or board and where the project management role was vested in an external (usually architectural) consultant.
Table 7. Type of management structure

PM model6245In-house team4533MD/consultant2216Other97Total138IOO
  In addition, three general patterns were identified that described the location of the professional design team (see Table 8). Not surprisingly, there was a strong association between the two variables: clients with an in-house design team were more likely to use a traditional architect-led project management system; others relied more heavily on consultants.
  As expected, the traditional in-house design and management team approach was predominantly found in public sector cases (especially local authority housing contracts); private sector clients, on the other hand, relied substantially more on internal project managers aided by consultant designers. Having said that, a quite sizeable number of public

	Bre.snet'i 	Haslatn
Table 8. Patterns of location of professional design tear,l
The direct, in-house cnnploymenl of at leas' 
engiiieering design tcalli !eader/project inanagerThe use ol' consultants io Lindertakc at leasf the architectural:/engineering design function87-ihe abscnce of any architecq,.engineer cmploycd directly or as consultant by the client (usually iii design- build situations)9
rrablc 9

clients (10, i.e. 23 00) relied on consultan!s for the design work, and 1 2 (i.e. 1 3 0/0) of the private clicnts used in-housc design teams. Among private sector firms, it tended to be smaller arid less expzricnced clients vvho adopted thc 'M D/consultant' method. As might be anticipated there was some connection (albeit sli'-'hl) belwecn intcrrtal iiianaøcrnent system contractual typc (sec Table 9). Clicnts with intcrnal project managers tended to underuse the traditional JCT form of contract and use alternativcs more often. In particular; design build contracts tended to be used ',.vherc the clicnt unploycd no in-house designers.
  As notcd it-I the prcvious section, clients lendcd not always to match cona-act choice Lo project type. Thc findings for their managerncnt systems showed an even sti-onger anu more consistent pattern. Most clients (79 0 ) classified the particular structure used in the projcvt as cither 'ofFacial policy' or 'normal practice'. This was equally true for both public: and private sec} or clients. Nearly two-thirds of those clicnts reportcd no exceptions to thc use o their standard practice. Of the rcmaindcr.. various reasons were given for any departurcs from the flOfiTl. However, these included not only the scale and l_ype of project. but also othcr internal reasorÄ most biy staff availability, Moreover. there was (.iirect between choice of systcn•, and the technical nature of the project complexity, etc). Again. project typicality was a factor that influenced choicc of managcmeat structure: would be projects [hat were smalle.i than norrnal for which alternative systems would be adopted. Furthermore, experience and fanliliarity *'ith the typc of work important explanatory factors: smaller, less experienced clients or those with no familiality of the typc of work would tend not to have any 'normal practice' and thus adopt morc üd hoc methods. Clients who were experienced and familiar with the type of work •would tend to have a normal practice and then stick to it.
  To summarize so far. appcars to be the casc that the choice management organization (and. to a lesser extent. thc choice of contract) is heavily influenced by client attributes Tather than project variables. Whether the project is 'typical' or not has an effect. However, 'typicality' is located within the context of client experience and familiarity and is not a direct function of the nature of the project. Despite the fact that projects may vary considerably in size and type, providing they are considered 'typical' or 'normal', then they will be 'slotted into' the normal managerial (and contractual) procedures that already exist. Consequently, differences in the use of particular systems are not on the whole tailored to match specific project requiremcnts, but rather to contain any departures from the norm. It is usually only smaller, inexperienced clients that choose their methods on a 'horses for courses' basis — and this is largely a reflection of the fact that they have to.
Project performance
Can any direct links be ascertained between the variables discussed in the last three sections and project performance? A varity of indicators were uscd to measure performance, including 'hard' measures of time and cost over-/undcr-run as well as 'soft' measures of client satisfaction with outcomes and with how the project was managed.
  The respondents were asked to estimate actual time and cost outcomes allowing for the effects of bad weather and price inflation (see Table 10). Standardizing the figures in Table 10 showed that, overall, most projects in fact performed quite well. On average, they were only 17% over programme and 8% over price. A fairly substantial proportion finished under or on programme (38%) and under or on cost (35%). Indeed, over half of the projects (56%) finished less than 10% over the planned duration and cost and nearly three-quarters (73%) less than 20%. It should perhaps be noted here that the over-representation of untypically large projects in thc sample (see Table 4) had no bearing on project performance: project performance was found to be unrelated to project typicality (see Appendix 2).
Table 10. Time and cost outcomes

Under planned duration86Under contract price2015Finished on time4533Finished on price3022Up to 10 weeks overrun4533Up to 	K over2820IO- 24 weeks overrun29
21ElOO-250 K over24Morc than 24 weeks overrun8251-500 K over1612Morc than E500 K over2015Total138IOOTotal138IOO
  The respondents were also asked to give the reasons for both delays to the programme and increased costs. Figure I summarizes the main reasons given for below par performance. As can be seen, much of the overspend was attributed to additional work and/or design variations. In 40% of the projects that fininshed over budget, the total extra cost was wholly due to extra work. It was substantially due to extra work in a further 40% of the cases. The main reasons given for delays were poor contractor/subcontractor performance as well as additional work. The interesting point to note here is the extent to which additional work. ordered or approved by the client still manages to create performance problems. The
                                                     oresnen f? 
Fie. l. Client's project : Perfocrnance indicators.
question might be raised of whether this reflects an inadequate brief, insufficient input from consultants or genuinc late changeq during construction. W hen questioned about the original brief, 38 (29 0 agreed with thc statement that it was 'in insutFlcient detail or prepared too quickly' and a further 14 (1 1 0/0) were undecided. Moreovcr, 45 (37%) agreed that 'omissions or errors' had occurred and a further 5 (12 0 ) wcrc undecided- Thc variation in response to these questions was unrelated to whether consultants or in-bonse designers were employed. What these findings suggest is the tendency for at least somc of the of additional work to be the result of inadequacies in the original bricf. A second interesting point to note is that, despite the increasing specialization of main contractors in menagmg what is nowadays largely subcontracted work delays caused by builders still appear to bc a significant problem.
  'l*hese 'hard' performance indicators were cross-tabulated directly with thc variables describcd ea rlier of client and project, contractual method, rnanagemcfit structurc}. However, only onc significant a_ssociation was found namely, that clients who einployed traditional in-house architectural team had projects that pcrfornied better in terms of cost, whereas those with an intcrnal projcct managerncnt system and consultants peformed less well (sec Appendix 2). This finding alone is of interest, because contirrns a tendency shown in the rest of the data. For instance, although thc lilidings were not significant, it was noticeable that, on balance. traditional contractual methods appeared to bc s\ightly bcüer at keeping costs down and worse at avoiding overruns, whereas alternatives (particularly design—build contracts) produced the opposite results. Moreover. silüilar tendencies found oncc client variables were clustered to enable a classification of client 'types' to be derived- In particular, it was found that large, experienced clients using project management (at 26% thc most popular type in thc sample) had the highest over-duration projects (10 weeks on average) and performed worst in terms of cost. In contrast, large,) experienced clients using an in-house architcct„led team (the traditional local authority set-up aad the least popular 'type' of client) performed best in tcrms of time (2 weeks overrun on average) and cost.
  Although these results should be treated with some caution, they do allow some interesting inferences to be drawn. In particular, the general trend of the findings appears to contradict conventional wisdom about the efficacy of project management. They also question the logic of the current trend away from employing designers direct towards hiring consultants instead. At best, there is no evidence in favour of the proposition that such systems enable better time and cost performance to be achieved. The same can be said of alternatives to the traditional JCT method of contracting. The type of contract used was not associated with time and cost performance; nor did it have any association with primary causes of delay and extra cost (i.e. additional work and contractor delays). It could reasonably be argued that these correlations are too direct and the results would be expected to depend upon the type of project (e.g. management contracting would be expected to perform better than a traditional form of contract on more complex projects). An attempt was made to assess this possibility by partialling out the effects of project complexity and other project variables. However, the results again showed no significant association, confirming the doubts that might be expressed on claims made about the emcacy of alternative contractual and managerial arrangements.
Client satisfaction
If there is no clear association between the client's method of organizing and 'hard' time and cost performance, is there a sense in which different methods have different consequences for performance in terms of more subjective criteria such as 'quality' outcomes and client 'satisfaction'? The levels of satisfaction expressed by clients across a range of performance variables are summarized in Table 11.
  What is perhaps surprising here is the consistency in response: overall, clients appeared to be reasonably satisfied with the outcomes obtained and with the means selected to achieve them. While this may in part be due to post-hoc rationalization on the part of clients basking in the glow of a completed project, it may also in part help put the problems reported in case study work in context. This is not to suggest either that problems do not occur or that the industry should be complacent about performance. Rather, it is to suggest that concentrating research interest upon unusually complex, untypical and problematic contracts may obscure the lessons that can be learned from more straightforward, typical and less problematic projects.
  In examining the correlates of satisfaction variables in more detail, two broad sets of conclusions emerged: first, that clients make relative judgements in assessing project performance and, secondly, that irrespective of their effect on actual time and cost performance, clients rate the performance of contractors differently under different forms of contract.
  Taking the first point, although there were no direct correlations between actual time and cost outcomes and client satisfaction with outcomes, when the former were standardized a much clearer association was found, i.e. performance relative to anticipated duration and cost was the baseline used for appraisal. Additionally, clients who had done similar work before were much more likely to express stronger satisfaction with good time and cost performance and stronger dissatisfaction with poorer performance. Similarly, the nature of the work affected ratings of time performance: clients with new build projects would be more dissatisfied with projects that overran than would clients doing refurbishment work. Finally, although there was no difference between private and public clients in their satisfaction Bresnen 	flasl(un

	Satisticd	(Dissatisfied
or vein w
Vaiue kor money i"ype contraci
Contractor performance(._'onlractor pekfovmancc92681 6Commitment and involvenneat93691 527Communications and co-ordination
Quality ol- work
Suitability for 			
S uncqiona] working

1 2777
96
1 61 5						 quality87979and co-ordination1 .3
		88	
	Physical disrnplion caused	97	8 1	8	7	1 5	1 3
	Professional tcaKü pcrformance	76	9
rcported at cost perforrnancc, private clients wcrc inorc likely to exp.-css stronger dissatisfaction with delavs than wc•re their public scctor counterparts_ i'he cvidcnce appears f.o suggest that c:b ients oftzn discount or augment their assessrnznts o? performance dcpcnding on their baseline expectati0fls.
  In terms of methods c! organization. there less satisfaction expres€*üd with both contractor pc:fcrmance and with the qnality of co-ordiæéudiori with the contractor a traditional form of contraci_ wa e used, and morc.: satisfaction e ,-pressq.x with ? design—build system. Strange!y, howevcr, satisfaction with the contractor's level of comznitment and their involvenlernt in the, teaii'l pointed marginally in the opposite direction - an interesting contrast to thc notion that design build methods ought to eng - better  It should be stressed that thesc findings were only of marginal statistical significa_nce. Ho•evevcr, thev werc considere_bly strengthened a110'„va we was made for thc typicality of thc system be;ng used (see Tlable \ 2 .
  Thosc clients for whorli toe syste:n was •normal practice' were either complemenkår_w of contractor pedormancc, co-ordination and cemmiftnent when performance good or morc critical when it was bad. For ex-arrnple,o greater dissatisfaction he expressed with poor contractor pcrrorruancc under a traditional mcthod if that [E,2tb.od was thc client's norm_a! practice. In other words. ratingq of contractor performance a_rc -weighted by prcvious experience using similar methods, suggesting that fatililiarity again brceds a greater Giticai awareness.
Table 12. Client satisfaction (X2 values)
Client satisfaction with  Type of management
structureContractual systemUse of the
 'normal' contractual systemOverall performance
Commitment and involvement
Communications and co-ordination24.93
24.6427.41a
23.69aaSignificant at the P < 0.01 level.
Discussion and conclusion
It is evident that the recent growth of interest in client organizations reflects a concern that the decisions that clients make in setting up a project can have significant effects upon construction project performance. The logic of this view suggests that if clients are better informed and 'educated' about the implications of various types of delivery system, they can then select the one which best suits their construction project needs.
  Hidden in this argument, however, is the presumption that clients may be comparatively new to construction project management and, therefore, somewhat unsophisticated and inexperienced in their use of project management and contractual systems. In many cases, this may be true. A small, inexperienced client who has not previously handled large-scale, complex projects, or one who faces for the first time a project of untypical magnitude and complexity, may well find this information and advice of considerable use. But not all clients arc like this. In fact, the industry is onc in which there are a sizeable number of regular clients whose average project is one in which they have considerable experience. Such clients typically manage a fair-sized portfolio of projects varying in scale and type, and will often have some in-house capacity and well-established mechanisms and procedures for handling them. These clients are by no means the 'naive' clients often typified in the construction management literature. Indeed, they are sophisticated and experienced enough to understand the process of construction and the potential for problems that are inherent in its uncertainty and complexity. Even their assessments of performance are informed by previous experiences and expectations based upon that experience.
  Such clients approach their projects with a consistency that belies the commonly held view that 'every project is different' and thus should be treated as such. In particular, the choices of project management systems and contractual forms are as much internally driven as projectdetermined. There may be a number of reasons for this consistency. First, clients operate in an institutional context in which certain procedures and mechanisms may be generally deemed desirable and appropriate (cf. Zucker, 1987). This may be particularly the case in the public sector, in which public accountability is a guiding influence. Secondly, a process of habituation may have occurred by which traditionally selected arrangements, having adequately served their purpose, are re-selected in preference to the uncertainty and disturbance that may ensue with a departure from normal practice. Hence, clients rely on 'tried and tested' methods, seeking a satisfactory, rather than optimal, solution to the project management problem (Simon, 1965). Thirdly, the choice may bc influenced by the direct calculation of resources and capabilities in relation to needs. Staff availability, economies of scale, etc., are here likely to be key factors in the decision-making process.

	Bresfte!Fi 	Haslam
  Whatever the reason or rcasons for this consistency in practice, there is clearly somc reluctance on the part of clients to re-orientate their systcms to meet the requiremcnts of particular projects. Moreover, judging by thc data on performance and satisfaction, there is no great perceived need to do except in exceptional circumstanccs. A traditional form of contract may or may not be the most optimal way of handling certain types of project. in so far as clients have experience with this mcthod and can make it work for them, then a satisfactory outcome may be all that is needed to help guarantee its future use.
  The last several years have seen a burgeoning of interest in alternatives to traditional contracting and managerial arrangements. The. age of reearding th_em as panaceas to tht industry's problems has novv well passed. and nowadays there is a much greater awareness of the importance of matching methods to suitable types of project. Yet there is still more than a hint of marketing in the writings of advocates of alternative contra_ctual and administrative procedures. Clients are not so ill-informed as to be unable to fathom this hidden agenda. Furthermore, their experience and the results of many studies suggest that there is no great weight to the argument that any one method will help guarantee improved performance greater satisfaction. At very best, the results are inconclusive and ambivalent. If clients continue to adopt practices that. others consider suboptimal. then it is because they have been able to make these methods *York to their satisfaction and also because they still remain to he convinced of the benefits of change.
References
Bryant. _().'T., Mackenzie, M.R. and Amos, W. (1969). The Role o!' ihe Ciient in Buildling. Docurne.a: No. IOR/335/2, Tavistock institute of Human Relations, London-
Bryman, A., Ford, JR., Keii, E.W., Beardsworth, A.D., M.J., Has-lam, C.O. and J. (1988). The contribution of client altitudes. organisation and expectations to performance on construction sites. SERC Final Report No. GR/D/64803. June.
Dickinson, I.J. (1979). Project management: The client's view. Struc.f.ural Engineer. 570, 410—14
Friend, J.K., Power, J.M. and Yewlett, C.J.L. (1974). Pubiic Planning: The Intercorporüte Dimension. Tavistock, London.
Mackenzie, J. (1979). A client's view of the industry. Building Technology ond Managemc"t, Septembe.
NEDO (1974). Before You Build: What a Cli.em. Needs to Know about the (lionstruction Industry (thc Wilson Report). HMS(). London
NEI)O (1975). The Public CiieF!t and th.e Constrnctiun Industries (the Wood Report). HMSO, London.
NEDO (1978). How Flexible is Construction? HMSO, London.
NEDO (1983). Faster Building for Industry. HMSO. London.
Simon, HA. (1965). Administrative Behaviour, 2nd edn. Heinemann. London.
Stocks, RK. and Male. S.P. (1983). An investiga_tion into the client's perceptions of conü-ac,tual forms and procedures. SERC Fin.al Report No. GR/C/29669.
Waters, B. (1978). Workwise. Building, 235m 94—8.
Zucker, L,G. (1987). institutional theolies; of organisations. Annual Revicv of Sociology, 13, 443--64.
.0.2001 

	Copyright 0 2001 	Rights 
	Bresnen 	Haslo.rt%t
Appendix 2. Client/project variables and their relaiionship with

	'lime	Cost
	outc01Tie	ou tcomc

Client uuriables
	Client type (public/private)	9.12
Ciient size
Client experience
Project eariables
'C'nc-off' or phase
	Sitc location	1 2.64
New or refurbish.tnent	7.97 'fypicality (size)	40.27
	Typicality (type)	7.05	6 21
	Project complexity	- 0.08 0
Organizational variables
Management set-up
	SVhether 'normal' pracuc,c	5.45
Location of design team
C.onjro.rtital ooyiables
Contractual systern	7.65	4.97 Whether •normal' pfactice	4.64 rrevious expcriencc of contractor	I .20
Note: A!l statistics arc valnes, except those marked " which are Spearman rank corrc!ulion coemcients.
*Significant Ht thc P < 0.01 lcvcl
	0 2001 .	Ri hts 
	328	Bresnen and 

Construction industry clients: A survey	329

Copyright 0 2001 . All Ri hts Reseved.

0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.



0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.

	328	Bresnen and 

Construction industry clients: A survey	329

Copyright 0 2001 . All Ri hts Reseved.

Co ri ht 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.

Construction industry clients: A survey	329

Co ri ht 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.

334	and 

Construction industry clients: A survey	329

Copyright 0 2001 . All Ri hts Reseved.

Co ri ht 0 2001 . All Rights Reseved.

334	and 

Copyright 0 2001 . All Ri hts Reseved.

334	and 

Construction industry clients: A survey

	Copyright 	All 	Reseved.

	. All 	Reseved.

334	and 

	Copyright 	. All Ri hts Reseved.

