
Liquid waste management in the construction sector: a systematic literature review
Gayani Karunasena, Akvan Gajanayake, W. M. Pabasara U. Wijeratne, Nick
Milne, Nilupa Udawatta, Srinath Perera, Andrew Crimston & Philp Aliviano
To cite this article: Gayani Karunasena, Akvan Gajanayake, W. M. Pabasara U. Wijeratne, Nick Milne, Nilupa Udawatta, Srinath Perera, Andrew Crimston & Philp Aliviano (2024) Liquid waste management in the construction sector: a systematic literature review, International Journal of Construction Management, 24:1, 86-96, DOI: 10.1080/15623599.2023.2211416
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/15623599.2023.2211416

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tjcm20
  

Liquid waste management in the construction sector: a systematic literature review
Gayani Karunasenaa, Akvan Gajanayakeb, W. M. Pabasara U. Wijeratneb, Nick Milnec, Nilupa Udawattaa,
Srinath Pererad, Andrew Crimstone and Philp Alivianof
a
School of Architecture and Built Environment, Faculty of Science, Engineering & Built Environment, Deakin University, Geelong, Victoria,
Australia; bSchool of Property, Construction and Project Management, Geosentinel Australia Pty Ltd, College of Design and Social Context, RMIT
University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; cSchool of Engineering, Faculty of Science, Engineering & Built Environment at Deakin University, Victoria, Australia; dSchool of Engineering, Design & Built Environment, Western Sydney University, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia;
e	f
GeoSentinel WASHBOX, Port Lincoln, South Australia, Australia; The Master Builders Association of Victoria, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
ABSTRACT
Liquid waste from construction sites can cause significant negative social, economic and environmental impacts. Generally, liquid waste from construction-related trades’ activities, such as product mixing, application and tool washing; stormwater run-off; and leaching of construction material, can pollute surface soil, water bodies and groundwater sources. Therefore, construction projects must have proper management of construction-related liquid waste. This study therefore undertook a systematic literature review (SLR) to analyse the literature on liquid waste management in construction projects. The study used the PRISMA (preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (method)) framework, and the bibliometric tool, VOSviewer, to analyse and present its findings. The SLR process identified and analysed 49 papers, published between 1992 and 2022, and found that liquid waste management was an often-overlooked area within the construction sector. The review identified three liquid waste focus areas: sources and composition of construction liquid waste; construction liquid waste control methods; and construction liquid waste management. The study’s findings identified a lack of integration between research on liquid waste management and research studies on construction site water pollution. The study’s contribution highlights the current progress of construction liquid waste management research and identifies the need for future research on efficient and effective implementation of liquid waste management practices in construction projects.ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 24 August 2022
Accepted 25 March 2023
KEYWORDS
Construction; liquid waste; liquid waste management; systematic literature review; wastewater
  
Introduction
The construction industry consumes 16% of the world’s water (GBCA 2009). Approximately 17% of water is used for direct functions at construction sites, while indirect activities account for around 25% of water usage (Long 2021). Water is required for various activities during the construction process, such as earthworks; dust suppression; cleaning or wash-down of plant, equipment and tools; washing aggregates; landscaping; concrete batching and curing; and staff amenities (Rahman et al. 2019; WBHO 2019). The construction process generates liquid waste onsite including wash water used in trades’ activities, stormwater run-off and groundwater (GBCA 2009; Karunasena et al. 2021). Generally, 20 L of liquid waste is discharged every minute due to construction activities (Karunasena et al. 2021). The type and volume of liquid waste generated from construction sites are impacted by internal factors, such as the stages of construction activities; type of construction; construction practices; and technology onsite and by external factors, such as changes in weather; standards and regulations; and geological conditions (Joshi et al. 2022). The main issue with the liquid waste generated due to construction activities is that it can contain particles, elements and chemicals harmful to humans, animals and the environment (Singh and Singh 2017). The main causes of construction liquid waste entering water bodies and the environment are: erosion from cleared sites; earthwork; stormwater run-off; rain; geography; geology; soil topography; insufficient liquid waste control methods; environmental discharges from wastewater treatment plants; lack of knowledge; issues in design; and lack of funding (Belayutham and Gonzalez 2013; Belayutham et al. 2016a). These factors can also be identified as the challenges and/or limitations of liquid waste management practices. Consequently, a standardized liquid waste management process is needed for construction projects.
CONTACT Gayani Karunasena gayani.karunasena@deakin.edu.au School of Architecture and Built Environment Faculty of Science, Engineering & Built Environment Deakin University, 1 Gheringhap Street, Geelong, Victoria 3220, Australia.
 2023 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The terms on which this article has been published allow the posting of the Accepted Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent.  Previous studies on construction liquid waste are very limited in number. Most studies that considered waste management in construction focused on solid waste management aspects (Shooshtarian et al. 2019; Kabirifar et al. 2020; Ferronato et al. 2021; Mydin 2022). Of those studies that investigated liquid waste management, most focused on the physical, chemical and biological properties of liquid waste (Okparanma et al. 2018; Dos Reis et al. 2020), on treatment methods or on reuse of wastewater (Rakshit et al. 2022; Collivignarelli et al. 2019). Only three studies investigated the loopholes in wastewater discharge during construction (Belayutham and Gonzalez 2013; Ock et al. 2016; Karunasena et al. 2021). However, it has been highlighted by researchers that liquid waste management practices are essential in construction (Karunasena et al. 2021; Joshi et al. 2022). Belayutham et al. (2016a) conducted an SLR for the period 1994–2014 on the causes of construction-related water pollution. However, to date, no study has undertaken an SLR on liquid waste management in construction. Therefore, this paper presents the SLR undertaken in the current study to identify prior research (from 1992 to 2022) on construction liquid waste management, with the aim being to understand the current state of the art on existing construction liquid waste practices. This review’s findings could be used as a baseline for future research related to liquid waste management in the construction sector.
Research methodology
An SLR follows a transparent, systematized process to gain clear results (Rodrigues and Franco 2022). Petticrew and Roberts (2008) proposed that the SLR process should: 1) clearly plan the review; 2) determine and locate the types of studies; 3) screen and critically appraise the selected studies; 4) synthesize the study findings; and 5) disseminate the findings. Therefore, for the SLR analysis in the current study, PRISMA method (PRISMA 2021), a well-established SLR and meta-analysis method, was used to identify the most relevant contributions to the literature on ‘the management of liquid waste discharge during construction’. Even though PRISMA sets the standard for publication, it allows the study’s research questions to be clearly defined (Hamzah et al. 2022) and provides a 27-item checklist to assist researchers to conduct a systematic literature search (Moher et al. 2010). The systematic search strategy of PRISMA helps to minimize different types of bias and to effectively synthesize the findings. Therefore, this study selected the PRISMA method to ensure the quality and transparency of the SLR process, when identifying the relevant literature. A relationship and network analysis of the prior literature was conducted to gain an understanding of when research saturation had taken place and to identify areas needing further research. A bibliometric network software tool, VOSviewer, was used to visualize and present the results based on text data, keyword occurrence and authors’ co-authorships.
  As shown in Figure 1, the SLR methodology of this study consists of three phases: 1) data selection and collection; 2) data analysis and visualization; and 3) synthesis of results and conclusions.
Phase 1: data selection and collection
To perform the SLR, this study followed the PRISMA guidelines and PRISMA flow diagram. The data selection and collection process were based on the three stages (identification, screening and inclusion) specified in the PRISMA flow diagram. As shown in Figure 1, this process was conducted in two steps: literature search and decisions on the eligibility of publications.
Literature search
A systematic literature search was conducted in November 2022. To answer the research question (see Table 1), articles that met the criteria presented in Table 1 were considered.
  The search was conducted on Scopus and Web of Science databases. The search process was first conducted to detect publications that included the following search items in their titles, abstract or keywords.
Scopus
TITLE-ABS-KEY ((‘construction industry’) AND (‘wastewater’ OR ‘liquid waste’ OR ‘groundwater’ OR ‘wash water’ OR ‘stormwater’
OR ‘trade water’ OR ‘trade waste’))
Web of science
TS¼ (((‘construction industry’) AND (‘wastewater’ OR ‘liquid waste’ OR ‘groundwater’ OR ‘wash water’ OR ‘stormwater’ OR
‘trade water’ OR ‘trade waste’)))
  

Figure 1. Systematic literature review (SLR) methodology.
Table 1. Criteria for literature search.

Research questionHow can wastewater generated during construction be managed effectively?Keywords/Search terms‘wastewater’ OR ‘liquid waste’ OR ‘groundwater’ OR ‘wash water’ OR ‘storm water’ OR ‘trade water’ OR ‘trade waste’ AND (‘construction’ OR ‘building development’)DatabasesWeb of Science, ScopusDates the search was conducted10.11.2022 to 17.11.2022Years covered1992–2022Language restrictionsEnglish only
Figure 2. Scopus search.

Figure 3. Literature search and eligibility assessment – PRISMA flowchart. Adapted from Page et al. (2021).
  
  The search was limited to all publications published in English between 1992 and 2022, and was conducted using ‘OR’ and ‘AND’ statements. For example, the Scopus search process is shown in Figure 2.
  Figure 3 shows the study’s literature search and eligibility assessment flow chart which was developed based on the PRISMA flow chart. Overall, 682 results (552 from Scopus and 130 from Web of Science) were identified through the search process. The results were extracted into comma-separated values (CSV) files and converted to Microsoft (MS) Excel files for analysis. This step helped to extract publication data, remove duplicates and screen publications based on their abstract and topic. In this process, 62 duplicate records were removed. Only publications reporting on studies related to the management of liquid waste generated during the construction process were considered in this analysis. Through the title and abstract screening process, 409 records were excluded as their titles were not relevant to the study’s scope and objectives: also excluded were publications without an abstract.
Eligibility of publications
The full texts of the remaining 211 publications were then read, and their eligibility, based on the current study’s scope, was assessed. In all, 169 publications were excluded as the studies that they documented had not explored liquid waste generated in the construction process. Finally, the remaining 42 publications were considered eligible for further analysis. Additionally, seven studies were identified through searching websites (n¼ 1) and citations (n¼ 6). Therefore, in total, 49 publications were deemed eligible for further analysis. The Mendeley Reference Manager’s open-source tool was used to organize the final set of 49 publications (Mendeley 2019).
Phase 2: data analysis and visualization
The publications identified in Phase 1 were classified based on the articles’ construction domains, such as building, infrastructure and industrial. The articles were then reviewed based on research criteria, such as authors, the year of publication, names of journals and conferences, the technique and method used, research objectives, research gap and problem, solutions presented, etc. The bibliometric network software tool, VOSviewer, was used to present and visualize the results. VOSviewer is a popular free tool used in an SLR to identify bibliometric networks based on text data and keyword co-occurrence, and
Table 2. Details of journals.
JournalNo.PublisherFieldEnvironmental Monitoring and Assessment2Springer International PublishingEnvironmental risksEnvironmental Science and Technology1American Chemical SocietyEnvironmental scienceExpert Systems with Applications1ElsevierExpert and intelligent systemsHydrological Processes1John Wiley & Sons LtdMovement and storage of water, run-off, groundwater, sedimentJournal of Civil Engineering and Management1Taylor & Francis LtdBuilding materials, geotechnical engineering, constructions technology, economy, managementJournal of Cleaner Production2ElsevierCleaner production and technical processes, sustainable development, environmental and sustainability assessment, sustainable products and services, governance, legislation, policy for sustainabilityJournal of Environmental Management1Academic PressManagement and valorization of waste, environmental analysis and assessment, social, economic and policy aspects of environmental managementJournal of Irrigation and Drainage Engineering2American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE)Water management and conservation, environmental impactsMaterials1MDPI AGMaterials science, materials engineeringNature Environment and Pollution Technology2Technoscience PublicationsSolid waste management, wastewater treatment and recycling, etc., monitoring, control and management of water and soil pollutionRoad Materials and Pavement Design1Taylor & Francis LtdRoad constructionScience of the Total Environment1ElsevierWater quality, environmental remediation of soil and groundwater, environmental impacts of waste or wastewaterSensors1MDPI AGMachine/deep learning and artificial intelligence (AI) in sensing and imagingTransportation Research Record2SAGE Publications LtdPolicy, planning, administration, economics and financing, operations, construction, design, maintenanceWaste Management2ElsevierWaste management policy, education, economic and environmental assessmentWater (Switzerland)1MDPI AGWater science, technology, management and governanceWater Practice and Technology1IWA PublishingWater and wastewater treatment and managementWater Research1ElsevierWater cycle, water quality, water managementApplied Ecology and Environmental Research1Corvinus University of BudapestEnvironmental protectionWater Science and Technology1IWA PublishingWater and wastewater treatment and managementJournal of Construction Engineering and management2American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE)Science of construction engineering and construction practicesJournal of Environmental Quality1John Wiley & Sons LtdEnvironmental science, waste management and disposal, water science and technologyJournal of Applied Sciences1Asian Network for Scientific InformationEnvironmental protectionPublic Works Management & Policy1SAGE Publications LtdPolicy, planning, administrationJournal of Infrastructure Systems1American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE)Civil infrastructure systemsWater and Wastewater International1Water and Wastewater InternationalEarth scienceauthors’ co-authorship networks of terms (Anastasiadou et al. 2021; Zabin et al. 2022; Di Vaio et al. 2023).
Phase 3: synthesis of results and conclusions
The findings derived in Phase 2 were then discussed in relation to the research question to propose recommendations and draw conclusions.
Results and discussion
Analysis of journal articles and conference papers
In this study, 49 publications were analysed, with this including 33 journal articles. Table 2 presents a summary of these journals with associated information, such as the journal name, field of research and number of publications in each journal. Two publications were identified in each of the following journals: Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, the Journal of Cleaner Production, Journal of Irrigation and Drainage Engineering, Nature Environment and Pollution Technology, Transportation Research Record, Waste Management and Journal of Construction Engineering and Management. Only one publication was identified in each of the remaining 19 journals. The top publishers with the most publications were Elsevier (5), MDPI AG (3), American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) (3), SAGE Publications Ltd (2) and Taylor & Francis Ltd (2). In terms of research areas, the analysed journal articles mainly related to water management and environmental management.
  The search also identified 12 conferences where relevant papers were published in the conference proceedings. Table 3 presents a summary of these conferences. The conferences’ major research areas were related to the environment, energy and earth sciences. Only five of the 12 conference proceedings focused specifically on construction and liquid waste.
  This study also identified two reports on liquid waste management and two book chapters on water pollution in construction. As both publications include content highly related to the scope of this study, they were considered in the analysis.
  The literature analysis based on areas of publication showed that research into liquid waste management in construction is dispersed across a wide range of research topics, ranging from
Table 3. Details of conferences.
ConferenceNo.PublisherFieldWinter Simulation Conference1Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc.ConstructionIECA Virtual Annual Conference and Expo 20211International Erosion Control AssociationEnvironment, energy and earth sciencesE3S Web of Conferences1EDP SciencesEnvironment, energy and earth sciencesIOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science1IOP Publishing LtdEnvironment, energy and earth sciencesWorld’s Largest: Soil and Water Event – Environmental Connection 20171International Erosion Control AssociationEnvironment, energy and earth sciencesMATEC Web of Conferences1EDP SciencesEnvironment, energy and earth sciencesIOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering1Institute of Physics PublishingMaterials science and engineering44th Australasian Universities Building Education Association (AUBEA) Conference1Deakin UniversityConstructionAnnual Conference of the International Group for Lean Construction (IGLC)1IGLC-21ConstructionAmerican Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME)
Energy-Sources Technology Conference and Exhibition (ETCE)1US Department of Energy – Office of Scientific and Technical InformationEnvironment, energy and earth sciencesInternational Erosion Control Association Conference1Erosion Control AssociationConstruction, environment, energy and earth sciences2010 International Conference on Management and Service Science1Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc.ConstructionFigure 4. Keyword co-occurrence by year.
environmental pollution to construction management, with no saturation reached in a specific area.
Keyword co-occurrence analysis
The keyword co-occurrence analysis was conducted using the VOSviewer tool. This analysis utilized a full counting method and consisted of 24 screened terms, with one being the minimum number of occurrences for a keyword.
  In the keywords used in the co-occurrence analysis, four clusters were found, as shown in Figure 4. As shown, the biggest nodes for each of the four clusters are management, construction site water pollution, environmental law implementation and accidental causation model. It should be noted that studies on stormwater pollution are considered under construction site management. Studies on wash water, groundwater or trade water are not presented under site water pollution or construction site management. Furthermore, management and environmental law implementation are interrelated. However, it should also be noted that no relationships are found between keywords related to management and environmental law implementation with construction site water pollution. The results show the lack of research on the impact of the implementation of legislation on construction site-related water pollution. The analysis results also
Figure 5. Authors’ co-authorship network based on year.
show that keywords related to management and environmental law occur in articles published between 2012 and 2020, whereas keywords related to construction site water pollution occur in articles published between 2014 and 2020. This illustrates that construction liquid waste management has traditionally been viewed from a water pollution perspective, with the focus on management and legislative practices being a more recent development.
Authors’ co-authorship analysis
The analysis of authors’ co-authorship was conducted with the VOSviewer tool using the full count method. The analysis considered the minimum threshold of authors as two, with seven authors meeting the threshold. However, all authors are included in the analysis, as shown in Figure 5. The top 10 authors are Perez, M.A. (6 documents; link strength: 20); Donald, W.N. (6 documents; link strength: 17); Zech, W.C. (6 documents; link strength: 17); Fang, X. (3 documents; link strength: 9); Al Khaddar, R. (1 document; link strength: 7); Al-Faluji, D. (1 document; link strength: 7); Alkizwini, R.S. (1 document; link strength: 7); Alyafei, A. (1 document; link strength: 7); Gkantou, M. (1 document; link strength: 7); and Hashim, K.S. (1 document; link strength: 7). Link strength indicates the number of co-authorship links of a given researcher with other researchers (van Eck and Waltman 2017). As shown, overall, the publication dates of the author cluster range from 1992–2022. The largest cluster is for the top four authors, ranked by link strength, with publications between 2016 and 2022.
  The co-authorship analysis shows that researchers in this area work very much in siloed research groups with very little crosscollaboration. This finding, together with previous findings in the journals and keywords analyses, illustrates that research is carried out with a focus on specific topic areas, most probably guided by the researchers’ research interests and expertise, rather than the significance and potential impact of research outcomes.
Country-wise analysis
Figure 6 presents the country-wise distribution of studies on construction liquid waste management.
  These findings show that, other than in the United States of America (USA), studies on construction-related liquid waste management are lacking in most parts of the world, including Australia. The analysis findings show that studies on construction liquid waste management and published in research publications have been conducted in countries in North America, Europe, Asia and Oceania. The USA has the highest number of studies while other countries, such as New Zealand, China, Australia and Malaysia, have very few publications.
  Therefore, to understand the impact of liquid wastewater management during construction in different parts of the world, more investigation is required. The saturation of studies from one country can indirectly influence these results by being generalized across other jurisdictions. These generalizations may not portray an accurate picture given that construction processes and impacts on the environment, as well as countries’ legal structures are different across regions. This is exacerbated by the recent increase in the number of papers focusing on management and regulatory aspects which can vary drastically across different countries.
Focus areas of construction liquid waste management research

Figure 6. Country-wise breakdown.
Table 4. Focus areas.
No.Focus areaSubcategories1
2
3Sources and characteristics of liquid waste
Construction liquid waste control methods
Construction liquid waste management







Pollutants leaching from building materials.
Pollutants leaching from materials used in road/earth construction.
Pollutants from washing machinery, tools and vehicles
Total suspended solids (TSS)
Prevention of groundwater contamination
Stormwater run-off control and control of leaching material
Reuse and recycling
Use of advanced information technology (IT) tools
Liquid waste discharge management
Regulatory requirementsThis section reports the results from the SLR in which 49 articles were analysed to identify liquid wastewater management practices during construction. The keyword occurrence analysis showed that the studies in relation to liquid waste management can be under two areas 1. construction site water pollution and 2. management of construction site water pollution. However, based on full text analysis of the articles, the research outputs of these studies contributing to construction liquid waste and management area can be further categorized under three major focus areas: 1) sources and characteristics of liquid waste; 2) construction liquid waste control methods; and 3) construction liquid waste management. Table 4 summarizes the findings under each focus area.
Sources and characteristics of liquid waste
The sources of construction liquid waste vary based on the processes which created the waste. Wastewater can be created by construction activities such as the airlifting process for cleaning bore piles; cleaning of tools and equipment; washing of construction material; discharge of water used in concreting; and demolition (Belayutham et al. 2016b; Degnan et al. 2016; Kazaz et al. 2021). These forms of liquid waste can contain various pollutants. According to one study (Butera et al. 2015), erosion, runoff and sediment are the most common sources of wastewater generation in construction. Erosion is caused through clearing the site; works near sensitive areas; earthworks; stormwater runoff; natural factors (soil, topography, rain, geography); control facilities (unavailability, insufficient, not well-maintained systems); designers’ issues (documentation error, failure to cooperate, lack of enforcement, knowledge deficiencies, design fault); unfavourable season (winter, rainy); being either planned or pushed due to contractors’ issues (process error, negligence, poor practices, waiting time and delays during earthwork and site development); schedule change; and clients’ issues (limited land area, lack of funding) (Belayutham and Gonzalez 2013; Butera et al. 2015; Belayutham et al. 2016b).
  Construction liquid waste can be categorized under physical characteristics, chemical characteristics and biological characteristics (Kang et al. 2016). Few studies investigate the physical characteristics of liquid waste, for example, total suspended solids (TSS) (Houser and Pruess 2009; Belayutham and Gonzalez 2013; Sillanp€a€a and Koivusalo 2015; Degnan et al. 2016; Kang et al. 2016; Mansour et al. 2019). Several studies investigate the chemical properties of liquid waste (Kang et al. 2016; Kazaz et al. 2021) highlighting that washing tools, equipment and materials can release toxic chemicals (e.g. oil, grease, solvents, paint, cleaning agents, hydrocarbons, etc.) into wastewater. Some studies assess the toxic impacts of heavy metals; nitrate (NO3) sources; polymer composites; and ash mixed with hot-mix asphalt leaching from industrial mineral waste in road and earth construction (Schwab et al. 2014; Tasneem et al. 2017; Liu 2018; Wakida and Lerner 2002; Mollinedo 2021). These studies highlight that pollutants, such as those listed, can cause groundwater contamination. One study (Degnan et al. 2016) investigates how the demolition process in construction can release toxic contaminants into liquid waste. A lack of studies in the literature investigating biological characteristics (microorganisms) is apparent as construction wastewater does not contain biological components (Kang et al. 2016).
  It can be concluded that, with the most common source of construction liquid waste being erosion and stormwater run-off, its toxicological effects could be minimal. However, even though other forms of liquid waste are low in volume compared to stormwater and groundwater, their toxicological effects need to be more carefully considered.
Construction liquid waste control methods
As shown in Table 4, most studies related to construction liquid waste management are focused on control methods and techniques. Studies on liquid waste control methods and techniques can be found under prevention of groundwater contamination; sediment control; stormwater run-off control; control of leaching building and construction materials; and reuse and recycling of liquid waste. Control strategies proposed by several studies for the prevention of groundwater contamination include planning construction development that is fit for the site layout; determining the limits of land clearing and shaping; minimizing excavation; trenching activities; proper housekeeping; preserving topsoil; and assigning designated areas to collect liquid waste from the construction work (Goodemote 2005; Faucette et al. 2009; Coulton 2010; Butera et al. 2015; Belayutham et al. 2016a, 2016b; Alyafei et al. 2020). Findings in the literature also reveal that most studies are focused on prevention and control of stormwater run-off and sediment control. Several studies discuss chemical treatment methods such as sedimentation and neutralization (Kang et al. 2016); coagulation and sedimentation (Kang et al. 2016); adsorption and electrochemical techniques (Kang et al. 2016); and the flocculated sediment polyacrylamide (PAM) method (Minton and Benedict 1999; Karunasena et al. 2021). A few studies investigate mechanical control strategies such as drainage control and slope stabilization (Butera et al. 2015; Belayutham et al. 2016b); horizontal directional drilling (Lowe and Watkins 1994); and sediment barriers (Zhang 2021; Faucette et al. 2009). Another study investigates biological treatment processes (aerobic and anaerobic) (Kang et al. 2016). Studies related to stormwater control in construction sites explore control measures such as site layout management; election of construction methods; the construction schedule; sequencing matters of concern such as land clearing and grading during the wet season, construction phasing for minimal exposure and construction sequencing to reduce equipment activities; changes to the natural slope and drainage system; sampling and monitoring stormwater suspended solids; and use of wire-backed non-woven geotextile silt fences (EPA 2009; Belayutham and Gonzalez 2013; Butera et al. 2015; Belayutham et al. 2016b; Degnan et al. 2016; Sameer and Rustum 2017). The review highlighted that most studies focus on managing stormwater rather than wash water or liquid waste that could include chemical or biological pollutants.
  Several studies consider the application of advances in drone technologies and information technologies for stormwater and sediment control, with this being an important research area. Within this domain, a few studies investigate expert systems for solving erosion and the sediment control problem generated by construction activities. These systems include the knowledgebased expert system, Multi-Criteria Erosion and Sediment Control (Alyafei et al. 2020); the decision support system for groundwater, surface water, and abstraction and return waters (Xu et al. 2010); Autodesk Building Information Modelling (BIM) tools and Civil 3D tools identifying an optimal detention pond location (Ooshaksaraie et al. 2012); the RP3CA (River Pollution Prevention Plan during Construction Activity) expert system with geographic information system (GIS) functions to mitigate stormwater pollution (Perera et al. 2021); and SEDspread, a spreadsheet-based application for sizing temporary sediment basin parameters (Perez et al. 2016, 2017, 2019). Studies such as (Kozicki et al. 2021) and (Sajjad et al. 2019) investigate the use of unmanned aerial vehicles for inspecting erosion and sediment control on sites, with these vehicles aiding the implementation of construction stormwater practices on sites. Studies also explore the application of deep learning-based object detection principles and images to accurately conduct construction stormwater inspections on construction sites (Liu 2018; Kozicki et al. 2021). These novel technologies aid engineers, contractors and decision makers on construction projects in effectively and efficiently planning erosion and sediment control. Unsurprisingly, most studies on the use of digital technology such as machine learning, drones and BIM for stormwater and sediment control can be found in more recent years between 2015 and 2021.
  Recycling and reuse of liquid waste generated in construction processes are another area that several studies investigate. Recycling of wastewater purifies the water and eliminates unpleasant odours (Donald et al. 2016). Recycling of effluent in the construction industry includes the filtration electrocoagulation method; biological treatment (aerobic and anaerobic processes) and electrochemical techniques (Barbosa et al. 2012; Perez et al. 2015; Kang et al. 2016; Wong 2002); and the closed loop wastewater recycling system for treatment of wastewater from manual washing of machines and construction equipment (Suer et al. 2014; Donald et al. 2016; Kang et al. 2016). The treated wastewater can be reused for other purposes. Two studies (Ock et al. 2016; Ahmad 2022) highlight that proper housekeeping is important for the control of construction liquid waste. Machinery, concrete mixers and tools should be cleaned outside the construction site, with the wastewater discharged at a designated place. It is also highlighted that appropriate discharge of sewage from toilets at the construction site needs to be ensured (Ahmad 2022). Overall, studies focus more on recycling and/or reuse of stormwater and effluent generated in construction sites, and less so on recycling and/or reuse of wash water which can contain more harmful chemicals.
Construction liquid waste management systems
Few studies investigate a framework for liquid waste management, with a specific focus on stormwater, sediment control and the impact of sewer discharge of construction waste. Studies (Belayutham et al. 2016b) and (Butera et al. 2015) propose that construction-related stormwater management systems need to consider the site layout, construction methods and construction schedule. Under site layout, sensitive areas need to be considered, such as easily compacted soil, natural preservation areas, drainage channels, protection for native soil and natural vegetation areas, fencing in relation to the existing tree canopy, proper signage, staging area, storage areas and washing bays (Butera et al. 2015; Belayutham et al. 2016b). Construction methods for work such as trenching and excavation need to reduce and minimize activities that involve soil compaction, while trees or woody vegetation should be cut rather than pushed over with equipment, excavations should be restricted in sensitive areas and equipment with the least ground pressure should be used (Butera et al. 2015; Belayutham et al. 2016b). Phasing the activities is also important. Therefore, when scheduling the project, the following points need to be considered: establishing phases of construction within the work zone; developing the sequence of construction and methods to be used within the phases and schedule; phasing the grading and earthmoving operation to expose the smallest practical area for the shortest possible time; and scheduling large disturbance activities, such as clearing, grading and heavy construction activities during dry season (Butera et al. 2015; Belayutham et al. 2016b). One study (Ahmad 2022) investigates the development of a construction waste management system from the perspective of the supply chain and green sustainable development. Although the study has not entirely focused on liquid waste management, it highlights that the logistics, capital flow and information flow of the operating network need to be considered for an effective waste management system. In addition, one study (Belayutham et al. 2016b) highlights that construction liquid waste management needs to consider planning its operation to fit the existing site features; establishing erosion and sediment practices; scheduling activities; selection of proper methods, materials and equipment; access route, site layout and management; inspection; maintenance; training; enforcement; housekeeping; etc.
  Only four studies investigate the regulatory requirements associated with construction liquid waste management, two of which explore the regulatory requirements and practices related to liquid waste generated during construction projects in Australia (Perez et al. 2015; Kazaz et al. 2021). Both studies stipulate that improvements are needed in Australia’s current regulatory framework and level of awareness related to trade wastewater management. Tilford et al. (2000) and Begum and Pereira (2008) suggest that a legal framework for understanding the impacts of construction liquid waste is required to improve contractors’ awareness. A study in Saudi Arabia, Mendis et al. (2015) highlight that more attention needs to be given to construction-related wastewater discharges, with further investigation necessary in the area of auditing and increased availability of review teams on environmental practices. A study in Canada investigates the rework/waste generation due to ambiguity/errors in construction contract documents (Ock et al. 2016). The study highlights that ambiguity in contractual clauses can lead to ineffective management of construction waste, including liquid waste. A life cycle assessment model developed by Bilec et al. (2010) to aid decision making is used to analyse the impact of construction liquid waste.
  As the above analysis shows, few studies investigate approaches for better liquid waste management in the construction process (Ooshaksaraie et al. 2012; Schwab et al. 2014; Butera et al. 2015; Mendis et al. 2015; Perez et al. 2015; Belayutham et al. 2016b; Kang et al. 2016; Kazaz et al. 2021; Perera et al. 2021; Ahmad 2022). Moreover, most studies focus on controlling or reducing the biological, chemical and physical properties of liquid waste or on methods and techniques for controlling the liquid waste generated on construction sites (Belayutham and Gonzalez 2013; Butera et al. 2015; Perez et al. 2015; Belayutham et al. 2016a, 2016b; Degnan et al. 2016; Donald et al. 2016; Kang et al. 2016; Perez et al. 2016, 2017, 2019; Sameer and Rustum 2017; Tasneem et al. 2017; Liu 2018; Sajjad et al. 2019; Whitman et al. 2019; Zhang 2019, 2021; Mollinedo 2021; Alyafei et al. 2020; Fifield 2021; Karunasena et al. 2021; Kazaz et al. 2021; Kozicki et al. 2021; Joshi et al. 2022). Section 3.4 discusses the current lack of integration between research on liquid waste management and research studies on construction site water pollution. This study’s review highlights the lack of research on system-wide analysis of liquid waste management in the construction sector. A system-wide understanding is important as liquid waste management relies heavily on the regulatory environment and existing infrastructure within a region. Given the site-specific nature of construction projects and construction’s temporary nature, more attention needs to be paid to how liquid waste management fits into a region’s water and wastewater management system. Therefore, further investigation is needed on the relationship of liquid waste management practices with the construction industry and the associated regulatory framework.
Conclusion
In conclusion, this study has conducted a systematic review of studies in the literature on liquid waste management in construction. The study used the PRISMA framework combined with the bibliometric tool, VOSviewer, to analyse and present the findings. The PRISMA framework helped to systematically collect and screen the literature, with 49 records filtered from 682 records through this process for analysis. The VOSviewer visualization helped to map the links between keywords and authors’ co-authorship. This process helped to develop a deeper understanding of the status and development of construction liquid waste management as a research area. The number of relevant papers identified for this review highlights the lack of research focus on liquid waste management within the construction sector. This is in stark contrast to solid waste management in the construction sector, which the construction and waste management disciplines both have as their focus. The lack of research does not necessarily mean that liquid waste is less important than solid waste from either social or ecological points of view. The socio-environmental impacts of construction liquid waste can be significant, with negative impacts on natural water systems and sewer and wastewater infrastructure, while construction waste is typically considered to be inert material.
  The analysis of author networks found that research on construction liquid waste has been carried out in a very single discipline-oriented manner, with very few transdisciplinary studies. Collaboration across research teams is found to be minimal: this can result in research being guided by the researchers’ research interests and expertise, rather than the significance and potential impact of research outcomes. The current study’s findings show the lack of integration between research on liquid waste management and the research studies on construction site water pollution. In the 30-year time period investigated between 1992 and 2012, most studies focused on construction liquid waste characteristics and sediment control mechanisms. However, from 2000 to 2022, the amount of research on the management and regulatory factors of construction liquid waste has been gradually increasing. This review’s analysis of 49 publications identified the following three focus areas related to liquid waste management in construction: construction liquid waste sources, construction liquid waste control methods and construction liquid waste management. This study also highlighted that most studies focus on management methods for stormwater and groundwater, with minimal focus given to recycling and reuse activities, especially to wash water from trades’ activities which can have higher levels of pollutants. Future studies could undertake further investigation on effective management of liquid waste, and on regulatory requirements and methods that can best address the prevailing challenges in liquid waste management. Therefore, the contribution of this study is to highlight the current progress in construction liquid waste management research and to highlight the need for future research on efficient and effective implementation of liquid waste management practices in construction.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
Funding
This study is supported by the 2022 Mini ARC Analog Programme (MAAP) of the Faculty of Science, Engineering and Built
Environment at Deakin University, Australia.
References
Ahmad R. 2022. Assessing the impact of socio-technical congruence in software development: a systematic literature review. Kuwait J Sci. 49(1):1–43.
Al-Ani IAR, Sidek LM, Desa MNM, Ahmad Basri NE. 2012. Hybrid knowledge-based expert system and multi-criteria analysis for minimizing erosion and sedimentation due to stormwater in Malaysian construction sites. Water Pract Technol. 7(2).
Alyafei A, Alkizwini RS, Hashim KS, Yeboah D, Gkantou M, Al Khaddar R, Al-Faluji D, Zubaidi SL. 2020. Treatment of effluents of construction industry using a combined filtration-electrocoagulation method. IOP Conf
Ser: Mater Sci Eng. 888(1):012032.
Anastasiadou M, Santos V, Dias MS. 2021. Machine learning techniques focusing on the energy performance of buildings: a dimensions and methods analysis. Buildings. 12(1):28.
Barbosa AE, Fernandes JN, David LM. 2012. Key issues for sustainable urban stormwater management. Water Res. 46(20):6787–6798.
Begum RA, Pereira JJ. 2008. Environmental problems in Malaysia: a view of contractors’ perception. J Appl Sci. 8(22):4230–4233.
Belayutham S, Gonzalez V. 2013. Integrating lean into stormwater runoff management: a Theoretical Exploration. In: 21st Annual Conference of the International Group for Lean Construction (IGLC 2013). p. 835–844.
Belayutham S, Gonzalez VA, Yiu TW. 2016a. A cleaner production–pollution prevention-based framework for construction site induced water pollution. J Cleaner Prod. 135:1363–1378.
Belayutham S, Gonzalez VA, Yiu TW. 2016b. The dynamics of proximal and distal factors in construction site water pollution. J Cleaner Prod. 113:54–65.
Bilec MM, Ries RJ, Matthews HS. 2010. Life-cycle assessment modeling of construction processes for buildings. J Infrastruct Syst. 16(3):199–205.
Butera S, Christensen TH, Astrup TF. 2015. Life cycle assessment of construction and demolition waste management. Waste Manag. 44:196–205.
Collivignarelli MC, Canato M, Abba A, Miino MC. 2019. Biosolids: what are the different types of reuse? J Cleaner Prod. 238:117844. Coulton R. 2010. Phasing out unscrupulous wastewater disposal. Water Wastewater Int. 25(4):48.
Degnan	JR,	Bohlke€	JK,	Pelham	K,	Langlais	DM,	Walsh	GJ.	2016.
Identification of groundwater nitrate contamination from explosives used in road construction: isotopic, chemical, and hydrologic evidence. Environ Sci Technol. 50(2):593–603.
Di Vaio A, Hasan S, Palladino R, Hassan R. 2023. The transition towards circular economy and waste within accounting and accountability models: a systematic literature review and conceptual framework. Environ Dev Sustain. 25(1):734–810.
Donald WN, Zech WC, Perez MA, Fang X. 2016. Evaluation and modification of wire-backed nonwoven geotextile silt fence for use as a ditch check. J Irrig Drain Eng. 142(2):04015050–11.
Dos Reis GS, Cazacliu BG, Correa CR, Ovsyannikova E, Kruse A, Sampaio CH, Lima EC, Dotto GL. 2020. Adsorption and recovery of phosphate from aqueous solution by the construction and demolition wastes sludge and its potential use as phosphate-based fertiliser. J Environ Chem Eng. 8(1):103605.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2009. Effluent limitations guidelines and standards for the construction and development point source category. Final rule. p. 62996–63058.
Faucette LB, Scholl B, Beighley RE, Governo J. 2009. Large-scale performance and design for construction activity erosion control best management practices. J Environ Qual. 38(3):1248–1254.
Ferronato N, Moresco L, Guisbert Lizarazu GE, Gorritty Portillo MA, Conti F, Torretta V. 2021. Comparison of environmental impacts related to municipal solid waste and construction and demolition waste management and recycling in a Latin American developing city. Environ Sci Pollut Res. 128:1–15.
Fifield JS. 2021. Approved SWPPPs do not illustrate how to prevent sediment discharges or erosion. In: IECA Virtual Annual Conference and Expo.
Goodemote GJ. 2005. Keeping it real. Public Works. 136(8):56–58.
Green Building Council of Australia (GBCA). 2009. https://www.gbca.org.au/ uploads/180/2484/deo%20prasad%20-%20unsw.pdf.
Hamzah H, Hamzah MI, Zulkifli H. 2022. Systematic literature review on the elements of metacognition-based Higher Order Thinking Skills (HOTS) teaching and learning modules. Sustainability. 14(2):813.
Houser DL, Pruess H. 2009. Effects of construction on water quality: a case study of the culverting of Abram Creek. Environ Monit Assess. 155(1–4): 431–442.
Joshi K, Navalgund L, Shet VB. 2022. Water pollution from construction industry: an introduction. In: Malik JA, Marathe S, editors. Ecological and health effects of building materials. Cham: Springer International Publishing; p. 245–257.
Kabirifar K, Mojtahedi M, Wang C, Tam VW. 2020. Construction and demolition waste management contributing factors coupled with reduce, reuse, and recycle strategies for effective waste management: a review. J Cleaner Prod. 263:121265.
Kang J, King SE, McLaughlin RA. 2016. Flocculated sediments can reduce the size of sediment basin at construction sites. J Environ Manage. 166: 450–456.
Karunasena G, Udawatta N, Crimston A, Gamage SV, Gajanayake A. 2021. Are we handling trade wastewater discharge effectively during building construction in Australia? In: 44th Australasian Universities Building Education Association (AUBEA) Conference. p. 296.
Kazaz B, Poddar S, Arabi S, Perez MA, Sharma A, Whitman JB. 2021. Deep learning-based object detection for unmanned aerial systems (UASs)-based inspections of construction stormwater practices. Sensors. 21(8):2834.
Kozicki M, Guzik K, Deptuła H, Tomaszewska J. 2021. Leaching and VOC emission tests of polymer composites produced from post-consumer waste in terms of application in the construction sector. Materials. 14(13):3518.
Liu G. 2018. Types of environmental pollution caused by real estate construction projects and their control measures. Nat Environ Pollut Technol. 17(3):1035–1041.
Long. 2021. How construction sites can minimize water pollution, Construction 21 [accessed 2022 April 14]. https://www.construction21.org/ articles/h/how-construction-sites-can-minimize-water-pollution.html.
Lowe II, Watkins WS. 1994. Viability of horizontal directional drilling utilization for soil and groundwater remediation (no. CONF-940113-). New York, NY: American Society of Mechanical Engineers.
Mansour MAA, Khadar SDA, Falqi IIA. 2019. Analyzing the implementation of environmental laws in the Saudi Arabian construction industry. Appl Ecol Env Res. 17(2):3781–3802.
Mendeley E. 2019. [Accessed 2022 March 10]. https://www.mendeley.com/
?interaction_required=true.
Mendis D, Hewage KN, Wrzesniewski J. 2015. Contractual obligations analysis for construction waste management in Canada. J Civil Eng Manag. 21(7):866–880.
Minton G, Benedict AH. 1999. Use of polymers to treat construction site stormwater. Proceed Int Eros Control Assoc Conf. 30:177–188.
Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG; PRISMA Group. 2010. Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. Int J Surg. 8(5):336–341.
Mollinedo DLG. 2021. Construction machine scrubbing, water management. In: E3S Web of Conferences.
Mydin MAO. 2022. Solid waste management practice, handling and planning in the construction industry. Res Dev Sci Technol. 3:134–140.
Ock J, Issa RR, Flood I. 2016. Analysis tools for stormwater controls on construction sites. In: 2016 Winter Simulation Conference (WSC). IEEE. p. 3337–3344.
Okparanma RN, Araka PP, Ayotamuno J, Mouazen AM, Dune KK. 2018.
Towards enhancing sustainable reuse of pre-treated drill cuttings for construction purposes by near-infrared analysis: a review. J Civil Eng Constr Technol. 9(3):19–39.
Ooshaksaraie L, Basri NEA, Bakar AA, Maulud KNA. 2012. RP3CA: an expert system applied in stormwater management plan for construction sites in Malaysia. Expert Syst Appl. 39(3):3692–3701.
Ortiz-Martınez VM, Andreo-Martinez P, Garcia-Martinez N, de los Rıos AP, Hernandez-Fernandez FJ, Quesada-Medina J. 2019. Approach to biodiesel production from microalgae under supercritical conditions by the PRISMA method. Fuel Process Technol. 191:211–222.
Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Bossuyt PM, Boutron I, Hoffmann TC, Mulrow CD, Shamseer L, Tetzlaff JM, Akl EA, Brennan SE, et al. 2021. The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews. BMJ. 372:n71.
Perera S, Hardie M, Ratnasabapathy S. 2021. Liquid waste management in the construction projects.
Perez MA, Zech WC, Donald WN. 2015. Using unmanned aerial vehicles to conduct site inspections of erosion and sediment control practices and track project progression. Trans Res Rec. 2528(1):38–48.
Perez MA, Zech WC, Donald WN, Fang X. 2016. SEDspread: sediment-basin design tool for construction sites. J Irrig Drain Eng. 142(12):4016064–11.
Perez MA, Zech WC, Donald WN, Fang X. 2017. SEDspread: a sediment basin design tool for construction sites. In: World’s largest: soil and water event – environmental connection.
Perez MA, Zech WC, Donald WN, Turochy R, Fagan BG. 2019. Transferring innovative erosion and sediment control research results into industry practice. Water (Switz). 11(12):2549.
Petticrew M, Roberts H. 2008. Systematic reviews in the social sciences: a practical guide. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
PRISMA. 2021. PRISMA statement [accessed 2022 January 24]. http://www. prisma-statement.org/PRISMAStatement/.
Rahman MM, Rahman MA, Haque MM, Rahman A. 2019. Sustainable water use in construction. In: Sustainable construction technologies. UK: Butterworth-Heinemann. p. 211–235.
Rakshit Jain NM, Ajay N, Vinyas Gowda PU. 2022. An experimental study on usage of treated wastewater (domestic) on the fresh and hardened properties of conventional vibrated concrete for sustainable construction. In: Sustainability trends and challenges in civil engineering. Singapore: Springer; p. 215–228.
Rodrigues M, Franco M. 2022. Bibliometric review about eco-cites and urban sustainable development: trend topics. Environ Dev Sustain. 24(12):13683– 13704.
Sajjad RU, Paule-Mercado MC, Salim I, Memon S, Sukhbaatar C, Lee CH. 2019. Temporal variability of suspended solids in construction runoff and evaluation of time-paced sampling strategies. Environ Monit Assess. 191(2): 110.
Sameer M, Rustum R. 2017. Studying the impact of construction dewatering discharges to the urban storm drainage network(s) of Doha city using infoworks integrated catchment modeling (ICM). MATEC Web Conf.
120:08010.
Schwab O, Bayer P, Juraske R, Verones F, Hellweg S. 2014. Beyond the material grave: life cycle impact assessment of leaching from secondary materials in road and earth constructions. Waste Manag. 34(10):1884–1896.
Shooshtarian	S,	Maqsood	T,	Khalfan	M,	Wong	P,	Yang	R.	2019.
Construction and demolition waste management in Australia: review of differences in jurisdictional regulatory frameworks. In: Proceedings of the CIB World Building Congress. p. 11.
Sillanp€a€a N, Koivusalo H. 2015. Stormwater quality during residential construction activities: influential variables. Hydrol Process. 29(19):4238–4251.
Singh RL, Singh PK. 2017. Global environmental problems. In: Principles and applications of environmental biotechnology for a sustainable future. Singapore: Springer; p. 13–41.
Suer P, Wik O, Erlandsson M. 2014. Reuse and recycle – considering the soil below constructions. Sci Total Environ. 485–486(1):792–797.
Tasneem KM, Eun J, Nam B. 2017. Leaching behaviour of municipal solid waste incineration bottom ash mixed with hot-mix asphalt and Portland cement concrete used as road construction materials. Road Mater Pave Des. 18(3):687–712.
Tilford KR, Jaselskis EJ, Smith GR. 2000. Impact of environmental contamination on construction projects. J Constr Eng Manage. 126(1):45–51.
van Eck NJ, Waltman L. 2017. Manual for VOSviewer v.1 6.6. Netherlands: University Leiden.
Vu TH, Nguyen HVH, Pha: m TCA, Dang QN. 2022. Towards sustainability in waste management: a systematic literature review. JIEM. 22(1):100–128.
Wakida FT, Lerner DN. 2002. Nitrate leaching from construction sites to groundwater in the Nottingham, UK, urban area. Water Sci Technol.
45(9):243–248.
Whitman JB, Zech WC, Donald WN. 2019. Full-scale performance evaluations of innovative and manufactured sediment barrier practices. Trans Res Rec. 2673(8):284–297.
Wilson Bayly Holmes (WBHO). 2019. [Accessed 2022 June 4]. https://www. qprc.nsw.gov.au/files/assets/public/major-works-amp-projects/ede/ede-construction-water-faq.pdf.
Wong KS. 2002. Effective wastewater treatment/recycling technologies for construction industry—a local experience. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Advances in Building Technology, Hong Kong, China; p. 1423–1430.
Xu LP, Ni FQ, Ren HZ, Fu CW, Xiang L, Jing X. 2010. Water resources proof decision support system for construction projects. In: International Conference on Management and Service Science. IEEE. p. 1–4.
Zabin A, Gonzalez VA, Zou Y, Amor R. 2022. Applications of machine learning to BIM: a systematic literature review. Adv Eng Inf. 51:101474.
Zare M, Pahl C, Rahnama H, Nilashi M, Mardani A, Ibrahim O, Ahmadi H. 2016. Multi-criteria decision making approach in E-learning: a systematic review and classification. Appl Soft Comput. 45:108–128.
Zhang H. 2019. Environmental pollution generated by architectural engineering construction and environmental management and control measures. Nat Environ Pollut Technol. 18(2):445–450.
Zhang S. 2021. Research on the construction of green transport network for construction waste. IOP Conf Ser earth Environ Sci. 781(3):032050.

  

  

  
88		G. KARUNASENA ET AL.
  
	INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT		87
  

  
