
Stress among South African construction professionals: a job demand-control-support survey
Keith Cattell, Paul Bowen & Peter Edwards
To cite this article: Keith Cattell, Paul Bowen & Peter Edwards (2016) Stress among South
African construction professionals: a job demand-control-support survey, Construction
Management and Economics, 34:10, 700-723, DOI: 10.1080/01446193.2016.1203967
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/01446193.2016.1203967

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rcme20
   
Construction Management and Economics, 2016
Vol. 34, No. 10, 700–723, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01446193.2016.1203967
Stress among South African construction professionals: a job demand-control-support survey
KEITH CATTELL1, PAUL BOWEN1* and PETER EDWARDS2
1
Department of Construction Economics and Management, University of Cape Town, Private Bag, Rondebosch 7701, Cape Town,
South Africa 2
School of Property, Construction & Project Management, RMIT University, GPO Box 2476, Melbourne 3001, Australia
Received 4 December 2015; accepted 16 June 2016
Research into workplace stress in the construction industry has been dominated by studies undertaken in Hong Kong, England and Australia, with relatively little attention having been paid to African countries. A purposively selected sample of thirty-six construction professionals (comprising architects, project managers, construction managers, engineers and quantity surveyors) based in Cape Town, South Africa, were surveyed regarding their perceptions about, and experiences of, workplace stress. The purpose was to identify and rank job demand, job control and job support factors and to analyse these by gender and professional grouping, both in terms of how respondents perceived them, as well as in terms of how frequently they had experienced them. The main finding was that respondents’ perceptions about the importance of job demand, job control and job support factors were largely consistent with their own experience of these factors. Distinguishing between perceptions and experience of stressors and moderators of stress was, however, considered valuable because the fact that differences were found indicates the need for precision in the design of scales. The highest ranked factors were, respectively, ‘critical time constraints’, ‘volume of work’ and ‘adequate compensation (salary)’. Women and men ranked items differently, as did the various professional groups. The main conclusions were that the construction project environment is a time-pressured, complex, environment in which work-life balance is negatively affected, particularly for women. Control over the type, flow and volume of work were perceived to be the main moderators of stress, whilst salary and career path opportunities were perceived to be the main job support moderators of stress. The applicability of using the job demand–control–support framework was confirmed given that the main stressors, control and support moderators were found to be to be largely consistent with the findings of previous studies. Future research taking a gendered approach should anticipate issues important to female respondents and should consider the benefits of qualitative methods. The design of research focusing on construction professionals should consider using the project team as the unit of analysis to ensure that the influence of the interconnectedness of participants’ roles is taken into account.
Keywords: JDC-S model, job control, job demand, job support, workplace stress.
   
Introduction
Background
*Author for correspondence. E-mail: Paul.Bowen@uct.ac.za
© 2016 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis GroupThe working environment and the nature of work itself are both important influences on the health and wellbeing of working people (Marmot and Wilkinson, 2006) and, thus, their efficiency. Psychosocial risks have been identified as one of the key emerging risks facing workers’ occupational health and safety today (European Agency for Safety and Health at Work, 2009). Linked to psychosocial risks, issues such as work-related stress, workplace violence and harassment are widely recognized as major challenges to occupational health and safety, and more broadly, to public health (European Agency for Safety and Health at Work, 2009).
   Psychosocial risk refers to the potential for the psychological or physical well-being of a worker to be harmed as a result of how work is designed and managed within organizational and social contexts (Cox and Griffiths, 2005). The work factors associated with psychosocial risk are excessive workload and work pace, job uncertainty, inflexible work schedules, irregular, unpredictable or unsocial work hours, poor interpersonal relationships, lack of participation, unclear role in the organization, poor communication, poor career development and conflicting demands of work and home (Cox, 1993). The impact of psychosocial risks on individual employees can be that both their performance and their health deteriorate under conditions where they are unable to develop appropriate controls or coping responses to chronic strain (McTernan et al., 2013). Occupational stress occurs when workers are unable to cope with or control the demands of their work environments (European Agency for Safety and Health at Work, 2009). Consequently, the effect of their diminished performance, due to psychosocial risks, manifests as a financial burden to the individuals themselves, as well as to organizations and societies (European Commission, 2002; European Agency for Safety and Health at Work, 2009). The European Agency for Safety and Health at Work (2014) review of literature quantifying the cost of work-related stress and psychosocial risks concludes that the financial burden on societies is considerable, costing societies and organizations billions of Euros annually, a finding which establishes a strong business case for the prevention of such risks (European Agency for Safety and Health at Work, 2014).
   Leung, Chan et al. (2015) list 46 construction sector work stress studies done over the past 25 years, with various foci. Approximately half of the studies involved construction company employees (workers/labourers: 19%; site managers: 9%; cost estimators/personnel: 19%) and half involved consultants/professionals (engineers: 9%; project managers: 9%; other professionals: 35%). The geographical spread of these studies is skewed towards Hong Kong (50%), England (15%) and Australia (15%), with only 11% having been undertaken in African countries. Against this background, there is a strong case for more research to be done in the African context. South Africa’s apartheid history makes it a case of special interest, given the abundance of unskilled labour and the shortage of skills in the construction professions (Department of Higher Education and Training, 2014), as well as the high levels of stress reported by construction professionals (Bowen et al., 2013).
   The purpose of the current study was: firstly, to identify the main self-reported demand, control and support factors perceived by construction industry professionals in South Africa, with the intention of informing the design of interventions; secondly, to determine whether differences exist between perceptions of these factors’ importance and the frequency of respondents’ personal experience thereof; thirdly, to identify differences in responses in terms of gender and professional grouping; and finally to test whether expanding the set of variables used in a study undertaken by Bowen et al. (2013) would produce new information. The research question is stated as: ‘What are the main job demand, job control and job support factors perceived as important and experienced frequently by men and women construction professionals in South
Africa?’
Theoretical framework
The research reported in this paper expands the Bowen et al. (2013) study of construction industry professionals. The theoretical framework adopted in that study was based on the job demand–control–support (JDCS) model of occupational stress (see Johnson and Hall, 1988), the appropriateness of which was argued in Bowen et al. (2013). According to the JDC-S theory of occupational stress, jobs that are simultaneously high in demands, low in control and low in workplace social support are experienced as the most stressful and produce the most damaging health impacts (Michie,
2002).
   The scale items used by Bowen et al. (2013) in their research instrument were adaptations of the Job Content Questionnaire (JCQ) (Karasek, 1985). Karasek (1985) encouraged the adaptation of the scales to deal with the ‘situation-specific’ measurement of ‘detailed problems that are important in the surveyed work site’. Although this was probably intended to encourage the broadening of Karasek’s (1985) JCQ, the researchers modified the original scale items to include items deemed more appropriate for the South African construction industry, informed by the literature (Sutherland and Davidson, 1989; Cox, 1993; Michie, 2002; Sale and Kerr, 2002; Haynes and Love, 2004;
Loosemore and Waters, 2004; Leung et al., 2005; Ng et al., 2005; Leung, Skitmore et al., 2007; Leung, Chan et al., 2009; Love et al., 2010; Ibem et al., 2011; Pinto et al., 2014). The findings of the Bowen et al. (2013) research showed strong support for the JDC-S model. The research instrument used in that study contained nine items in the ‘Job Demands’ scale, six in the ‘Job Control’ scale and four in the ‘Support at Work’ scale. In the analysis of the data, it emerged that greater complexity in the scales would benefit the interpretation of how control and support factors moderate workplace stress.
   The findings of the current study are an important step towards deepening our understanding of workplace stress in the South African construction sector, which will, in turn, provide a foundation for the development of appropriate interventions.
Job demand
Job demand refers to the stressors involved in accomplishing one’s workload, dealing with unexpected tasks, and handling job-related personal conflict (Karasek, 1979, 1985). It can be understood as the perception of the relationship between the amount of mental and physical processing capability, or resources available, and the amount required by the task (Demerouti et al., 2001). Research has identified the following as significant stressors for construction managers: work over- and under-load, role conflict and role ambiguity, unpaid overtime, cost/budget constraints and financial pressures, lack of career progression opportunities, working with a range of personalities, travel, keeping abreast of evolving technology, fear of retrenchment/redundancy, clients’ demands, shortage of resources, and task frustrations (Sutherland and Davidson, 1989; Chartered Institute of Building, 2006; Love et al., 2010).
Job control
Job control refers to the employee’s degree of control, or decision latitude, over his or her tasks and conduct during the working day (Karasek, 1979). It can be regarded as a perceived ability to exert some influence over the work environment in order to make it more rewarding and less threatening (Ganster, 1989). Previous studies of occupational stress have shown that lack of job control can be an important cause of strain in various occupations such as nursing and construction (Karasek, 1979; Sauter et al., 1989). Job control concerns the issue of participation in the organization, which can be reflected in whether or not employees feel they have the right to speak freely about matters of concern (Frese, 1987). It also encompasses the balance between levels of authority and responsibility. Tasks associated with low levels of authority and high levels of responsibility deprive employees of the ability to exert influence over their work and the working environment, thereby inducing stress (Schieman and Reid, 2009). Lack of control may also affect relationships with project team members or superiors, the consequences of which (such as arguments with colleagues) can significantly affect stress levels (Leung et al., 2009). Conversely, good interpersonal relationships at work can facilitate good performance (Djebarni, 1996) that, in turn, can help to alleviate stress (Jex, 1998).
Job support
Job support refers to being trusted, respected and supported by colleagues and superiors. Working in such conditions enhances employees’ sense of well-being and reduces their stress, which can positively influence commitment and improve job satisfaction (Stenman et al., 2010). Those who perceive themselves as having support from their supervisor report more job satisfaction, more emotional commitment to the organization and less turnover intentions (Taylor, 2008). In addition, job support from both supervisors and colleagues can act as a moderator of stress (Mayo et al., 2012).
The South African context
South Africa is the fourth most populous country in Africa, with a population of 50.5 million and in 2011 accounted for the third highest share of the African economy after Nigeria and Egypt. Together with Algeria, these four countries account for 60% of Africa’s GDP (African Development Bank, 2014).
   South Africa has a working age population of 36 million and in 2014 had an unemployment rate of 25% (strict definition) or 36% (expanded definition), which is considered very high by global standards. The construction sector absorbs 7.9% of the 15.1 million employed people in the country (Statistics South Africa, 2014b) and contributes 4% to GDP
(Statistics South Africa, 2014a). Official statistics put the proportion of women at 50% of economically active professionals (Department of Labour, 2005), but the percentages of professional women in the construction sector are significantly lower. Percentages of women in the construction professions were as follows in 2013: architects, 20%; quantity surveyors (QS), 12%; civil engineers, 2%; construction project managers, 3%; and construction managers, 0.6% (Council for the Built Environment, 2013).
   Under apartheid, South Africans were classified as ‘white’ (i.e. of European origin), ‘black’ (i.e. of African origin), ‘coloured’ (i.e. of mixed European and African or Indonesian or Malaysian ancestry), or ‘Asian’ (i.e. of Indian origin). Post-1994, the South African government introduced affirmative action policies (Republic of South Africa, 1996, 2000), which under the umbrella of broad-based black economic empowerment (BBBEE) – defined as the ‘viable economic empowerment of all black people’ (Republic of South Africa, 2013, p. 4) – includes preferential procurement in the award of building contracts and the appointment of consultants. ‘Fronting’, defined as any practice that undermines the achievement of the objectives of the BBBEE Act, is a problem and is a punishable offence (Republic of South Africa, 2013, p. 4). Preferential procurement is only applicable to public sector projects, but consultancies that operate in both the public and private sectors typically employ sufficient previously disadvantaged individuals and/or include them as owners, specifically to gain advantage when tendering on public projects. At several levels, there is the potential for these practices to be felt as discriminatory and for them to result in work-related stress (King, 2005; De Haas et al., 2009; Dollard et al., 2012).
   In order to better understand the characteristics of the sample surveyed in the current study, the following should be noted. Architects, engineers, construction managers, project managers and QS are all required by law to register with their respective professional Councils before being allowed to practice for their own account, but registration is typically a requirement for employees as well. In all of these professions, the route to registration is both long (degree courses of 4 years minimum) and essentially exclusive, with ‘white’ people enjoying an advantage in that they typically come from greater wealth, attend better schools and thus meet university entrance requirements more easily. Not all higher education institutions’ degree programmes are accredited by the registration Councils. Those that are accredited are mainly at the better-resourced, more expensive, established universities with the student profile in these disciplines being disproportionately ‘white’.
Gender
Loosemore and Waters (2004) surveyed Australian construction professionals with the aim of testing the hypothesis that high levels of stress exist among female construction professionals and that there are differences in the stress levels of men and women. Using Cooper’s Occupational Stress Indicator (OSI) (Cooper et al., 1988) on a sample of 84 men and 47 women, arguably reflecting the general underrepresentation of women in the industry, they found that ‘long hours of work’ and ‘too much work’ were the greatest sources of stress for both men and women.
   The general finding of their study was that men reported experiencing marginally higher levels of stress than did women in all categories of the OSI (factors intrinsic to the job, managerial role, relationships with others, career and achievement, organizational structure and climate), except ‘career and achievement’ where men and women experienced stress equally. Statistically significant differences were found for risk-taking, disciplinary roles and implications of mistakes, where men, more than women, experienced greater stress related to their relatively senior positions. Men were also found to experience greater stress than women due to the threat of impending redundancy and changing jobs to progress their careers, indicating that women experienced greater job security than did men as a result of their relatively lower and less vulnerable positions. The areas where women experienced greater stress than did men included: ‘opportunities for personal development, rates of pay, keeping up with new ideas, business travel, the accumulative effect of minor tasks, and factors not under their control’ (Loosemore and Waters, 2004, p. 131).
   Sang et al. (2007) consider the Loosemore and Waters (2004) findings surprising and suggest that the paucity of research comparing stress experienced by men and women in the construction industry reflected both the relatively low number of women working in the industry and compromised the potential for meaningful statistical comparisons. They argue the need to investigate the role of gender in terms of how it defines stress experienced by architects, since many previous studies had focused on the lived experience of architects without adopting this lens. Much of the body of research focused on the experience of women in architecture and drew conclusions relating to: their ‘victim’ status (Sang et al., 2007, citing Adams and Tancred, 2000); discrimination against them in practices and on site, as well as in level of pay (Kingsley and Glynn, 1992; Whitman, 2005); task restrictions and consequent effect on promotability; and poor work-life balance (Anthony, 2001; Whitman, 2005). Other research was limited in its ability to draw comparisons between men and women because of the selection of women-only samples (Caven, 2004; De Graft-Johnson et al., 2005).
   Sang et al. (2007) surveyed 75 male and 35 female architects in the UK, comparing job satisfaction of men and women. They found that men generally reported greater job satisfaction than did women. The only statistically significant differences were found for ‘physical working conditions’, ‘opportunity for promotion’ and ‘the way that their practice is managed’, where women were less satisfied than men (Sang et al., 2007, p. 1310). They concluded that their findings probably reflected the general subordination of women, both within the architectural profession as well as in the construction industry, with the consequent effect of higher levels of attrition (Sang et al., 2007).
   Bowen et al. (2013) surveyed 554 male and 122 female construction industry professionals. They noted a caveat with regard to potential sample bias, suggesting that women architects, engineers and QS appeared to be overrepresented compared with the registered populations of such professionals (Council for the Built Environment, 2013), and that women construction and project managers were not represented at all. Statistically, proportionately more women were architects than in all other professional groups. Regarding overall levels of stress, the study found that stress level was significantly related to gender with proportionately more women reporting high levels of stress compared to men. Considering job demand factors, Bowen et al. (2013, p. 401) found that a significant relationship existed between hours of work and gender, with men claiming to work longer hours than did women. Gender was also found to be significantly related to feelings of ‘job security’ and ‘perceived ability to acquire a similar job without undue delay’, where it was found that proportionately more men than women were optimistic (Bowen et al., 2013, p. 399). Job control factors similarly revealed significant relationships in terms of gender, where men reported more control than did women over ‘what work is done’, ‘pace of work’ and ‘work environment’ (Bowen et al., 2013, p. 398). No significant relationships were found for job support factors and gender, generally. However, within professional groupings, it was found that a significant relationship existed between male and female QS and ‘reliance on colleagues to help with difficult situations’, with more men than women claiming to be able to rely on their colleagues for assistance (Bowen et al., 2013, p. 399).
   The Bowen et al. (2013) study concluded that its findings were consistent with those of previous research (Goldenhar et al., 1998; Caven, 2004; Sang et al., 2007) that women in the construction industry, and especially women architects, experienced higher levels of stress than did similarly employed men.
Construction professionals
Several recent studies have focussed on stress of construction professionals, typically including architects, construction and project managers, engineers, QS and estimators (see Chartered Institute of Building, 2006; Lingard and Francis, 2006; Love et al., 2010; Ibem et al., 2011; Mostert et al., 2011; Leung and Chan, 2012; Bowen et al., 2013; Poon et al., 2013; Bowen et al., 2014; Leung, Bowen et al., 2015). Only Bowen et al. (2013) presents a statistical analysis in which it is possible to interpret differences between the various professional groupings with reference to job demand, job control and job support factors.
   Bowen et al. (2013) found significant differences between professional groupings in a study of 676 professionals comprising architects, civil engineers, project managers, construction managers and QS. Based on a self-assessment of overall stress levels, architects considered themselves the most highly stressed, followed by civil engineers, QS, and project and construction managers. With reference to job demands, the study found that significantly more project and construction managers reported being stressed by the requirement to work to tight deadlines than did the other professionals. Another significant finding was that proportionally more engineers reported having to work long hours as a
   stressor, compared with other professional groupings. Considering organizational stressors, architects were significantly more pessimistic than other professional groupings about the security of their existing jobs, as well as their perceived ability to get another job reasonably quickly. Significant differences were found between professional groupings in respect of job control factors, with architects, more than all other professionals, reportedly having less control over ‘work environment’, ‘pace of work’ and ‘workplace tasks’ (Bowen et al., 2013, p. 398). No significant differences were found between professional groupings for job support items.
   Referring to stressors related to the work environment, Bowen et al. (2013) found the following, significantly in all cases. Architects, followed by QS, engineers and project/construction managers (PCM), reported not being able to speak openly about matters of concern. Similarly, architects, more than QS, believed that they lacked the necessary authority to match the responsibility of their jobs, but engineers and PCM did not agree with this. Only architects felt that having more time would enable them to do a better job and they further believed that they were not fairly remunerated, more so than the other professionals.
Research method and questionnaire design
The research instrument
Three sections of a multisectional questionnaire, comprising scales for Job Demand (25 items), Job Control (19 items) and Job Support (17 items) factors (see Table 1), are reported and analysed in this paper.
   Scale items were largely drawn from the literature (see Sutherland and Davidson, 1989; Haynes and Love, 2004; Ng et al., 2005; Leung, Skitmore et al., 2007; Leung, Chan et al., 2009; Love et al., 2010; Ibem et al., 2011), but were augmented with additional items based on the researchers’ combined knowledge of, and experience in, the South African construction industry. Additional input was provided by an industrial psychologist.
Administration of the survey
Given the complexity of the survey instrument, it was deemed necessary to meet with respondents to explain the research and the requirements. The first ten
Table 1 Scales of job demand, job control and job support items perceived as contributors to, or moderators of, workplace stress
ItemJob demand variables (25-item scale)Job control variables
(19-item scale)Job support variables
(17-item scale)1.Critical time constraintsFlow of workCo-worker competence2.Critical cost constraintsVolume of workSupervisor competence3.High level reporting demandsType of workCo-worker support4.Frequency of reporting demandsPhysical environmentSupervisor support5.Complexity of project problemsPower to delegateCo-worker interpersonal skills6.Adequacy of technical resources (ICT, etc.)ErgonomicsSupervisor interpersonal skills7.Task frustrations (interruptions)Decision-making authorityFairness of criticism from others8.Level of cooperation from other project stakeholdersDecision latitudeRecognition from others9.Level of professional skills requiredStaff availabilityFreedom to speak openly10.Amount of professional experience requiredStaff competenceOpportunities for skills enhancement11.High-level meetings requiredTeam size/compositionPositive job security12.Number of meetings requiredICT resourcesAdequate compensation (salary)13.Leadership skills neededBusyness and breaksAppropriate career path potential14.Number of other staff involvedWork travelFreedom from health issues15.Information processing level requiredRole conflictAbsence of personal/family issues16.Long working hours requiredForced redeploymentAbsence of harassment at work17.Interpersonal skills requiredForced relocationAbsence of discrimination at work18.Red tape levels encounteredForced shift-work19.ICT competence level requiredForced termination20.Need to ‘prove’ oneself21.Skewing of work-family life balance22.Job travel demands23.Disruption to meal patterns24.Disruption to leisure activities25.Disruption to sport/exercise activitiescompleted questionnaires, the completion of which was assisted by the researchers, were treated as a pilot study. These ten respondents were asked to comment on the adequacy of the instrument. No changes were suggested, but they considered the length of the entire multisectional instrument to be problematic. Consequently, the researchers decided on a field administration approach and met with all subsequent respondents to explain the research and requirements. Research assistants were engaged to do this.
   Purposive sampling was used to identify suitable respondents. This sampling method ensured representation of professional disciplines and both genders (Patton, 2002). The target frame was restricted to professionals working in the construction industry in the Western Cape province of South Africa, and largely to the metropolitan boundaries of Cape Town. Respondents were selected on the basis that they were experienced, defined as being registered with a professional Council with at least five years post-registration work experience. Thirty-six completed surveys (including the 10 from the pilot study) have been concluded. The profile of the respondents comprised: 11 architects (7 male, 4 female); 8 PCM (7 male, 1 female); 5 engineers (4 male, 1 female); and 12 QS (7 male, 5 female). The racial profile of the sample was 75% ‘white’, 17%
‘coloured’ and 8% ‘black’.
   The small sample size is a limitation of the research reported in this paper and the results should be interpreted with caution. This is particularly true of the gendered analysis of the responses of PCMs and engineers, where each of these professional groupings had only one female respondent. Given the small overall sample size, the use of nonparametric statistical analyses was considered appropriate (see Pett, 1997; Corder and Foreman, 2014).
Results and analysis
The Job Demand scale measures typical job demand situations encountered by professionals working on projects in the construction industry. The Job Control scale measures employees’ degree of control, or decision latitude, over their tasks and conduct. The Job Support scale measures perceptions of trust, respect and support by colleagues and superiors.
   Respondents were asked (i) to rate how important they perceived each scale item to be and also (ii) to select and rank five of the same items in terms of how frequently they had personally experienced them. Hereinafter, the terms ‘perceived importance’ and ‘frequently experienced’ are used to refer to these two data sets. A five-point frequency scale with interval definitions was given for the rating of each item (1 = negligible or least frequently experienced; 5 = major or most frequently experienced). Respondents were invited to propose up to two additional items for each scale, but none did so. The importance of items in the Job Demand scale was rated in terms of the perception of items as stressors, but for the Job Control and Job Support scales, the rating was in terms the perception of items as moderators of workplace stress.
   The reliability of the instrument was tested (Cronbach’s alpha for the Job Demand, Job Control and Job Support scales is 0.89, 0.83 and 0.89, respectively), indicating very good-to-excellent internal consistency in each set. The data set was subjected to missing value analysis involving the detection of anomalies, with no anomalous cases being identified.
   The Kolmogorov–Smirnov test for normality was applied to the importance ratings, and the values of the statistic were below 0.05 for all items in each scale, indicating a violation of the assumption of normality. Nonparametric techniques were therefore employed to examine differences between groups in terms of gender and professional groupings. Specifically, the Mann–Whitney U-test was used to test for differences on the basis of gender, and the Kruskal–Wallis H-test for differences on the basis of professional grouping (see Pett, 1997; Corder and Foreman, 2014).
   Finally, an ‘impact score’ was calculated by multiplying the overall mean values of the top five frequently experienced Job Demand, Control and Support items (Tables 5, 7 and 9) by the mean values of those items’ perceived importance (Tables 2–4). These ‘impact scores’, which essentially represent the subjective emotion for each item, were then separately ranked for Job Demand, Control and Support items, and Mann– Whitney U-test and Kruskal–Wallis H-test statistics were used to analyse differences between genders and professional groupings.
Perceived importance of stressors and moderators
The highest ranked items in terms of their perceived importance were critical time constraints (Job Demand, see Table 2), volume of work (Job Control, see Table 3) and adequate compensation (salary) (Job Support, see Table 4). Deeper analyses of the rankings in each subscale, by gender and professional grouping, are presented below.
Job demand
A Mann–Whitney U-test revealed significant differences between male (Md = 2, n = 24) and female (Md = 3, n = 11) perceptions regarding: disruption to meal patterns, U = 65, z = −2.45, p = 0.014; disruption to leisure activities, U = 67.5, z = −2.38, p = 0.017; and disruption to sport/exercise activities U = 66.5, z = −2.38, p = 0.017 (see Table 2). Women, more than men, perceived all three of these factors to be stressors.
   According to a Kruskal–Wallis H-test, there were no significant differences between professional groupings in respect of Job Demand items. However, a noteworthy difference was found regarding the importance of disruption to sport/exercise activities, where PCMs and QSs considered this to be a greater stressor than did the other two professional groups (architects: n = 10; PCMs: n = 8; engineers: n = 5; QSs: n = 12), χ2 (3, n = 35) = 7.02, p = 0.071, with medians of 1.5, 4, 2 and 3.5, respectively (see Table 2).
Job control
The Mann–Whitney U-test revealed that the only significant difference between men (Md = 3, n = 24) and women (Md = 2, n = 11) was with regard to staff availability, U = 74, z = −2.11, p = 0.035, with men, more than women, regarding greater levels of control over staff resourcing to be a moderator of job stress (see Table 3). The test also indicated a noteworthy difference in the perceptions of men (Md = 2, n = 24) and women (Md = 3, n = 11) regarding the moderating influence of ergonomics, U = 80, z = −1.94, p = 0.053 (see Table 3), with women, more than men, perceiving control over ergonomics as having a moderating influence on stress.
   A Kruskal–Wallis H-test highlighted significant differences between professional groupings regarding control over the physical environment (architects: n = 10; PCMs: n = 8; engineers: n = 5; and QSs: n = 12), χ2 (3, n = 35)=9.04, p = 0.029, with medians of 3, 3.5, 3 and 1.5, respectively; and for forced relocation, χ2 (3, n = 35) = 8.57, p = 0.036, with medians of 1, 3.5, 2 and 1, respectively (see Table 3). PCMs, more than all the other professional groups, regarded control over the physical environment as an important moderator of stress, as did engineers, albeit to a lesser extent. Further, the test found a noteworthy difference in the perceptions of the various professional groupings regarding the moderating influence of type of work (architects:
Md = 3, n = 11; PCMs: Md = 3, n = 8; engineers: Md = 4, n = 5; QSs: Md = 2, n = 12), χ2 (3, n = 36)
   




   
= 7.55, p = 0.056 (see Table 3), with engineers, more than the other groups regarding control over this factor as an important moderator of stress.
Job support
A Mann–Whitney U-test found no significant differences between the perceptions of men and women regarding the impact of the Job Support items in moderating workplace stress. However, a noteworthy difference was found in the perceptions of men (Md = 1, n = 24) and women (Md = 2, n = 11) regarding the moderating influence of an absence of harassment at work, U = 89, z = −1.67, p = 0.095 (see Table 4). Women, more than men, regarded this factor as a positive moderator of workplace stress.
   A Kruskal–Wallis H-test revealed that there were no significant or noteworthy differences in the perceptions of the different professional groupings regarding the impact of Job Support items in moderating workplace stress.
Frequently experienced stressors and moderators
The highest ranked items, in terms of the frequency with which they were experienced, were critical time constraints (Job Demand, see Table 5); volume of work (Job Control, see Table 7); and adequate compensation (salary) (Job Support, see Table 9). Deeper analyses of the rankings in each subscale, by gender and professional grouping, are presented below.
Job demand
Comparing the rankings by gender (see Table 5), both men and women ranked critical time constraints as the most frequently experienced stressor and included cooperation from other project stakeholders, long working hours required, and critical cost constraints in their five most frequently experienced stressors. Only men included red tape levels encountered, and only women included skewing of work-family life balance.
   A Mann–Whitney U-test showed only one significant difference between men (Md = 0, n = 19) and women (Md = 0, n = 9): disruption to meal patterns, U = 57, z = −2.61, p = 0.009. Women experienced this more than men, but neither ranked this item in their top five frequently experienced stressors.
   Comparing the rankings by professional grouping (see Table 6), all groups ranked critical time constraints as the most frequently experienced stressor. The only other stressor included in the top five by all professional groups, was cooperation from other project stakeholders.
   Other noteworthy findings regarding the ranking of the top five frequently experienced stressors included the following: only architects and QSs ranked skewing of work-family life balance and long working hours required; only architects and PCMs ranked red tape levels encountered; only engineers and QSs ranked complexity of project problems; only PCMs ranked need to ‘prove’ oneself; and only engineers included level of professional skills required.
   The Kruskal–Wallis H-test for differences between professional groupings in frequently experienced stressors revealed only one significant difference, leadership skills needed (architects: Md = 0, n = 9; PCMs: Md = 0, n = 7; engineers: Md = 0, n = 4; and QSs: Md = 0, n = 12), χ2 (3, n = 32) = 11.26, p = 0.010.
Architects reported frequent experience of this stressor significantly more than did the other professionals.
Job control
A comparison of the rankings by gender (see Table 7) revealed that men and women ranked frequently experienced control items quite differently and only three (volume of work, flow of work and type of work) were included by both men and women in their top five.
   
Table 5	Five most frequently experienced Job Demand items – overall and by gender
Job demand itemOverall mean
(±SE)RanknMale mean
(±SE)RanknFemale mean
(±SE)RanknCritical time constraints3.32 (±0.337)1343.54 (±0.404)1242.80 (±0.611)110Level of cooperation from other project stakeholders1.77 (±0.343)2311.90 (±0.436)2211.50 (±0.563)410Long working hours required1.45 (±0.328)3291.30 (±0.371)4201.78 (±0.683)29Critical cost constraints1.42 (±0.321)4311.55 (±0.409)3221.11 (±0.484)59Complexity of project problems1.04 (±0.311)528––––––Red tape levels encountered–––1.29 (±0.373)521–––Skewing of work-family life balance––––––1.56 (±0.784)39
   
   Only women included control over decision-making authority and ergonomics and only men included control over staff availability and staff competence.
   The Mann–Whitney U-test for differences between men and women revealed two, namely control over: ergonomics (men: Md = 0, n = 19; and women: Md = 0, n = 9; U = 57, z = −2.62, p = 0.009); and staff availability (males: Md = 2, n = 20; and females: Md = 0, n = 9; U = 40, z = -2.56, p = 0.01). The former indicates that women, significantly more than men, had frequently experiencedcontrolover ergonomics ashavingamoderating influence on job stressors, while the latter revealed thatmen,significantlymorethanwomen,hadfrequently experienced control over staff availability as a moderator of stress.
   Comparing the rankings by professional grouping (see Table 8), it can be seen that none of the control items were ranked in the top five by all professional groupings. Control over volume of work and flow of work were both included in the top five by all professional groupings except PCMs; staff competence was included by all groupings except engineers; and staff availability was included by all groupings except architects.
   The following Job Control items were included in the top five by only one professional grouping: decision-making authority (architects); busyness and breaks and role conflict (PCMs); and power to delegate (QSs).
   The Kruskal–Wallis H-test found no significant differences between professional groupings.
Job Support
Comparing the rankings by gender (see Table 9), men and women ranked the top five frequently experienced support items differently and only two items (co-worker support and adequate compensation (salary)) were included in the top five by both men and women.
   Only women included recognition from others, absence of personal/family issues and supervisor competence, and only men included co-worker competence, fairness of criticism from others and appropriate career path potential.
The Mann–Whitney U-test found no significant differences between men and women.
   Comparing the rankings by professional grouping (see Table 10), it can be seen that no control item was ranked in the top five by all professional groupings.
   Co-worker support and adequate compensation (salary) were included in the top five by all groupings except PCMs; co-worker competence was only included by PCMs and QSs; fairness of criticism from others was only included by architects and PCMs; and appropriate career path potential was only included by engineers and QSs. The following items (see Table 10) were each only included by one professional grouping: supervisor competence and opportunities for skills enhancement (architects); supervisor interpersonal skills, positive job security and freedom from health issues (PCMs); recognition from others and supervisor support (engineers); and absence of personal/family issues (QSs). The Kruskal–Wallis H-test did not find any significant differences between professional groupings.
Impact scores
The highest ranked items in terms of ‘impact scores’ (see Table 11) were critical time constraints (Job Demands); volume of work (Job Control); and adequate compensation (salary) (Job Support).
   The Mann–Whitney U-test revealed one significant difference between men and women for Job Demands, where women (Md = 0, n = 9), more than did men (Md = 0, n = 19), found disruption to meal patterns, U = 57, z = −2.61, p = 0.09, to be a cause of stress. A Kruskal–Wallis H-test found one significant and one noteworthy difference among professional groups. Respectively, these were leadership skills needed (architects: Md = 0, n = 9; PCMs: Md = 0, n = 9; engineers: Md = 0, n = 9; and QSs: Md = 0, n = 9), χ2 (3, n = 32) = 11.26, p = 0.01, where architects found this to be a greater stressor than the other professional groupings; and need to ‘prove’ oneself (architects: Md = 0, n = 5; PCMs: Md = 0, n = 7; engineers: Md = 0, n = 4; and
   
Table 7	Five most frequently experienced Job Control items – overall and by gender
Job control itemOverall mean
(±SE)RanknMale mean (±SE)RanknFemale mean (±SE)RanknVolume of work1.74 (±0.226)1311.55 (±0.277)3222.22 (±0.619)19Staff competence1.55 (±0.265)2331.65 (±0.299)223–––Flow of work1.48 (±0.282)3331.17 (±0.272)5232.20 (±0.663)210Staff availability1.48 (±0.324)4292.00 (±0.397)120–––Type of work1.41 (±0.330)5321.36 (±0.403)4221.50 (±0.601)410Decision-making authority––––––2.20 (±0.646)310Ergonomics––––––1.33 (±0.667)59
Table 9	Five most frequently experienced Job Support items – overall and by gender
Job support itemOverall mean
(±SE)RanknMale mean
(±SE)RanknFemale mean
(±SE)RanknCo-worker support1.48 (±0.337)1311.36 (±0.381)4221.78 (±0.722)29Adequate compensation (salary)1.40 (±0.290)2301.14 (±0.311)5212.00 (±0.624)19Co-worker competence1.39 (±0.250)3331.48 (±0.307)223–––Fairness of criticism from others1.34 (±0.364)4321.65 (±0.447)123–––Appropriate career path potential1.16 (±0.302)5321.39 (±0.354)323–––Recognition from others––––––1.56 (±0.709)39Absence of personal/family issues––––––1.44 (±0.530)49Supervisor competence––––––1.40 (±0.653)510   
QSs: Md = 0, n = 12), χ2 (3, n = 32) = 7.54, p = 0.056, where PCMs found this to be a greater source of stress than did the other professional groupings.
   A Mann–Whitney U-test revealed two significant differences between men and women for Job Control items, where men, more than did women, found staff availability (men: Md = 7, n = 20; women: Md = 0, n = 9), U = 41, z = −2.49, p = 0.013; and women, more than men, found ergonomics (women: Md = 0, n = 9; men: Md = 0, n = 19), U = 57, z = −2.61, p = 0.009; to be moderators of stress. The Kruskal– Wallis H-test found no significant differences in ‘impact scores’ between professional groupings.
   One noteworthy difference regarding Job Support was highlighted by a Mann–Whitney U-test, which revealed that women (Md = 5, n = 9), more than did men (Md = 0, n = 21), regarded absence of personal/ family issues, U = 62, z = −1.75, p = 0.08 to be a moderator of stress. The Kruskal–Wallis H-test found no significant differences in ‘impact scores’ between professional groupings.
Discussion
The main contributors to stress, in terms of their perceived importance, were critical time constraints, level of cooperation from other project stakeholders, long working hours required, critical cost constraints, skewing of workfamily life balance, red tape levels encountered and number of meetings required. The first five of these items are mirrored in the computed ‘impact scores’ and the ranking of the first three items is identical. The main stressors can be characterized as pertaining to the job, relationships and work-life domains. It is important to make this distinction because different kinds of interventions would be needed to alleviate stress in each domain and only job-related stressors and, to some extent, work-life issues are capable of being influenced by employers. The highest ranking stressor in terms of perceived importance and frequency of experience, critical time constraints, is related to the nature of the job and could conceivably be ameliorated by employer intervention.
   The main perceived stressors are largely consistent with the literature (Sutherland and Davidson, 1989; Chartered Institute of Building, 2006; Love et al., 2010), with the exception of skewing of work-family life balance, the ranking of which was not expected to be as high. Sutherland and Davidson (1989) included this factor in a list of top ten stressors, ranked ninth. The Chartered Institute of Building (2006, p. 12) did not include it in the main survey instrument, but reported that it was raised as a ‘commonly recurring factor’ by respondents commenting on items they felt had been excluded. Using the International Survey of Stress and Mental Health Survey (SWS Survey), Love et al. (2010, p. 655) found that items relating to work-life balance (must worry about my work even when not at work; work interferes with other things I must do) were relatively weighty stressors. A possible inference is that poor work-family life balance is becoming a more chronic stressor, or that this finding is peculiar to the small sample in the current study, where it was ranked fifth (M = 3.4, Table 2). Considering this in context, ‘critical cost constraints’ was ranked higher than this (fourth) (M = 3.42), which was expected from the literature (Love et al., 2010). However, the adjacent lower ranked items were ‘red tape levels encountered’ (M = 3.11), ‘number of meetings required’ (M = 3.03), ‘complexity of project problems’ (M = 2.94) and ‘task frustrations’ (M = 2.92), all of which relate to factors intrinsic to the nature of the work. It is important to note they were all ranked lower as contributors to workplace stress than was skewing of work-family life balance.
   The analysis by gender of the perceived importance of stressors suggested that the higher than expected ranking of skewing of work-family life balance was influenced by women’s perceptions, given that the only significant differences (see Table 2) between men and women lay in three items which all relate to work-family life balance (disruption to meal patterns, leisure
   


   
activities and sports/exercise activities). Similarly, only women included skewing of work-family life balance, ranked third, in their five most frequently experienced stressors (see Table 5). Bowen et al. (2013) reported a general inability of construction professionals to successfully balance work-family responsibilities, but noted that there was no significant difference between men and women in this regard. Given the overrepresentation of women in their considerably larger sample, where there ought to have been a greater chance of discovering a gender bias, the findings of the current study should be viewed with caution. In the development of future scales, this issue should be responded to by the inclusion of items that are likely to capture a more nuanced view of how women experience poor work-life balance as a stressor, regardless of the likely ranking of this factor. Analysing the data by professional grouping, no significant differences were found between the groups regarding the perceived importance of stressors (see Table 2). However, differences emerged when the ranking of items was considered in terms of frequency of experience. All professional groupings, except architects, included critical cost constraints in their top five, which suggests that architects are typically good at designing to budget, or that QSs typically provide sufficient contingencies to accommodate uncertainties in the design process. Only engineers ranked level of professional skill required and only PCMs ranked need to ‘prove’ oneself in their five most frequently experienced stressors. The former finding is surprising, as one would expect both engineers and architects to have reported this, given their design roles, but architects only ranked this item eighteenth, whereas engineers ranked it fourth. The latter is not surprising because PCMs have the greatest involvement in planning and delivering against project programmes. Only architects and QSs included skewing of work-family life balance in their top five most frequently experienced stressors, suggesting that there is typically considerable pressure in the pre-contract stage, where these two professions work closely together, to produce tender documents against tight deadlines. The finding that only these two groupings included long work hours in their top five most frequently experienced stressors supports this inference, but contradicts the finding of Bowen et al. (2013) that, compared with other professional groupings, proportionally more engineers reported having to work long hours.
   Control over volume of work, staff competence, flow of work, type of work and staff availability were perceived as the main moderators of stress, in terms of both perceived importance and frequency of experience thereof (see Tables 3 and 7). The ‘impact scores’ mirrored these as the top five items, ranked in the same order as frequency of experience. All of these factors relate to work and the staff resources available to undertake it. This confirms the findings of Haynes and Love (2004) and Leung et al. (2007) with regard to workload, but highlights the importance of control over type of work and work flow, as well as over staff availability and staff competence.
   The analysis by gender of the perceived importance of stress moderators suggested that control over staff availability was significantly more important to men than it was to women (see Table 3). This was mirrored in the analysis of the ‘impact scores’ and is possibly due to the predominance of men in senior management positions in construction industry professional practices (Dainty, Bagilhole et al., 2000; Dainty, Neale et al., 2000; Bowen et al., 2013; Martin and Barnard, 2013). Other factors that affect women differently emerged when the ranking of items was considered in terms of frequency of experience, where it was found that women included control over decision-making authority and ergonomics in their top 5 (see Table 7), but men did not. Considering differences between professional groupings, control over both physical environment and forced relocation is significantly more important to PCMs than the other groups (see Table 3). The reason for this may lie in the nature of their work, in that some work assignments have the potential to be less attractive than others, e.g. rural or remote site locations. Interestingly, no single Job Control item was included by all professional groupings in the ranking of frequently experienced stress moderators. The following items were each included by only one of the professional groupings: decision-making authority and physical environment (architects); busyness and breaks and role conflict (PCMs); and power to delegate (QSs). This aligns with Bowen et al. (2013), who noted that architects experience less control over the physical environment than do the other professional groupings.
   The main Job Support items perceived to be important in the moderation of stress were adequate compensation (salary), co-worker competence, positive job security, supervisor competence and appropriate career path potential (see Table 4). These align with Leung et al. (2007) regarding the negative effects of low levels of reward, and Ng et al. (2005) concerning a lack of opportunity to learn new skills in terms of career path development, as well as a lack of autonomy in decision-making. The highest ranked frequently experienced support moderators (see Table 9) differ from these items by the exclusion of positive job security and supervisor competence, and the inclusion of co-worker support and fairness of criticism from others (see Table 12). The inclusion of co-worker support might be explained by Mayo et al.’s (2012) finding that the buffering effect of co-worker support varies depending on context. The ‘impact score’ rankings introduce supervisor support as a high-ranking
Table 12 Comparison of ranking of five highest ranked items: perceived importance, frequency of experience and impact scores
Perception of importanceFrequency of experienceImpact scoreFive top ranked Demand items
See Table 2)Five top ranked Demand items
(See Table 5)Five top ranked Demand items
(See Table 11)1. Critical time constraints1. Critical time constraints1. Critical time constraints2. Level of cooperation from other project stakeholdersa2. Level of cooperation from other project stakeholdersa2. Level of cooperation from other project stakeholdersa3. Long working hours required3. Long working hours required3. Long working hours required4. Critical cost constraintsa4. Critical cost constraintsa4. Critical cost constraintsa5. Skewing of work-family life balance5. Complexity of project problemsa5. Skewing of work-family life balanceFive top ranked Control items
See Table 3)Five top ranked Control items
(See Table 7)Five top ranked Control items
(See Table 11)1. Volume of worka1. Volume of worka1. Volume of worka2. Staff competencea2. Staff competencea2. Staff competencea3. Flow of work3. Flow of work3. Flow of work4. Type of work5. Type of work5. Type of work5. Staff availability4. Staff availabilitya4. Staff availabilityaFive top ranked Support items
See Table 4)Five top ranked Support items
(See Table 9)Five top ranked Support items
(See Table 11)1. Adequate compensation (salary)2. Adequate compensation (salary)1. Adequate compensation (salary)2. Co-worker competencea3. Co-worker competencea2. Co-worker competencea3. Positive job security
4. Supervisor competencea4. Supervisor competencea4. Appropriate career path potential5. Appropriate career path potential
1. Co-worker support3. Fairness of criticism from othersa4. Fairness of criticism from othersa5. Supervisor support(
(
(aNot included in the Bowen et al. (2013) survey.
moderator, which supports Taylor’s (2008) finding regarding the positive buffering effect of supervisor support. Here, it can be seen that the use of ‘impact scores’ causes an item to move up the ranking, revealing a relative importance that might otherwise have been overlooked.
   No significant differences were found between men and women regarding the perceived importance of support moderators, but only women ranked recognition from others, absence of personal/family issues and supervisor competence (see Table 9) in their top 5. This supports the characterization of women in the construction sector as typically occupying non-managerial, supportive roles (Dainty, Bagilhole et al., 2000; Dainty, Neale et al., 2000; Martin and Barnard, 2013). A noteworthy difference between women and men was, however, observed in the analysis of the ‘impact scores’, with women regarding the absence of personal/family issues to be more of a moderator of stress. Analysing the data by professional grouping, no significant differences were found between the groups (see Table 4). Eight different support items were each selected by only one of the professional groupings (see Table 10), but no clear inference can be drawn from this. The analysis shows that the higher ranking for supervisor support in the ‘impact score’ ranking is due to engineers’ experience of it.
   Reflecting on the research method, which involved asking respondents to rank both the perceived importance of demand, control and support factors and the frequency of their experience of the same factors, it appears that there is value in doing so because the rankings differ. This can clearly be seen in Table 12, where items below the dotted line in each category in the ‘Frequency of experience’ and ‘Impact score’ columns are those that differ from the five highest ranked items in the ‘Perception of importance’ column. The differences were not major in terms of the number of items that changed or shifted in the ranking, but the mere inclusion or exclusion of an item is sufficient justification to consider the method more useful than having adopted only one of these approaches, especially if the purpose of identifying items is to inform intervention. Similarly, the re-ranking of items using ‘impact scores’ is considered more useful than not doing so, because it surfaces items that would otherwise have been considered less important, or would have gone unnoticed. Further, analysing the data by gender and professional grouping is considered valuable because it allows a finer-grained interpretation of what informs the rankings and, therefore, the possibility of scoping interventions more precisely. Finally, the inclusion of additional items in the scales compared with the Bowen et al. (2013) study was successful in that the additional items not only attracted responses, but also several were ranked in the top five (see Table 12). This highlights the importance of selecting or developing appropriates scales.
Limitations of the current study
The current study is exploratory in nature and the sample size of 36 is relatively small. The findings should thus be interpreted with circumspection in terms of generalizability. Respondents were selected on the basis that they were registered professionals with at least five years of work experience, on the assumption that they would have been sufficiently exposed to job stressors and would have opinions about how they thought these could be moderated by control and support factors. Although the demographic profile of the sample was captured and reported, respondents’ ages were not recorded. This is a limitation, because the experience of stressors and the ways in which people cope with them do appear to differ across age groups (Aldwin et al., 1996).
   The validity of the research instrument cannot be demonstrated because of the exploratory nature of the research. We intend to use the ranking exercise derived from the current study to refine the items for use in a future version of the scales, after which we intend to test for construct validity in terms of the JDC-S model. The psychometric properties of the scales will be tested using exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses.
   The scope of the scales used in the current study excludes personal stressors, which have been identified in the literature (see, for example, Leung et al., 2008) as a category of stressor. Personal stressors were not included in the original JCQ (Karasek, 1985) and are excluded from many stress studies on construction professionals and employees (Ng et al., 2005; Melia´ and Becerril, 2007; Sang et al., 2007; Yip et al., 2008; Ibem et al., 2011; Leung and Chan, 2012; Chan, Leung et al., 2012; Lingard et al., 2012; Poon et al., 2013; Leung, Bowen, et al., 2015). Thus, the inclusion or exclusion of personality issues should be determined by the scope and purpose of the research. The purpose in this study was to identify stressors, control and support factors perceived as important and frequently experienced, and to understand how men and women and professional groups differ in such perceptions and experiences.
   The design of research aimed at understanding stress among construction professionals in terms of gender and in the African context should carefully consider whether to use established or bespoke scales, particularly if they are unlikely to capture issues specific to these contexts. Further, it should be questioned whether scales and quantitative analyses alone can achieve such understanding, and recognition should be given to the value and potential of qualitative methods to provide a fuller picture, particularly where open-ended questioning is likely to surface issues not contemplated in scales.
Conclusions
The purpose of the current study was as follows: firstly, to identify the main demand, control and support factors perceived by construction industry professionals in South Africa; secondly, to determine whether differences exist between perceptions of these factors’ importance and the frequency of respondents’ experience thereof; thirdly, to identify differences in responses in terms of gender and professional grouping; and, finally, to test whether expanding the set of variables used in Bowen et al. (2013) would produce new information. These purposes were all achieved and they define the contributions of this study as follows.
   The main stressors reflect the construction project environment as being time-pressured, complex, requiring cooperation between participants, and having a negative impact, particularly for women, on work-life balance. This is mirrored to some extent in the findings regarding job control, where control over the type, flow and volume of work, which are all related to time pressure and complexity, are perceived and experienced as important moderators of stress, as are issues concerning the availability and competence of staff. Similarly, the findings regarding job support are related to the identified stressors. Here, it appears that expectations of high salaries and good career path opportunities are linked to time-pressure and long working hours; and the competence and support of co-workers and supervisors is linked to cooperation between participants.
   The analysis by gender and professional grouping produced results that will influence how future studies are planned. Work-life balance issues emerged as highranking stressors, particularly for women, which leads to the conclusion that future scales should include items designed to capture the full breadth of the female experience of this stressor. Similarly, the experiences of women regarding the competence and availability of staff, decision-making authority, ergonomics and recognition from others as important moderators of stress suggests that scales should be designed to capture how these factors are influential. It is less clear how the differences found between professional groupings should be responded to in designing future scales, since the differences found in the current study appear to reflect the nature of the work and/or organizational issues typical to the various disciplines. This leads to reflection on whether, or in what context, one should treat such a diverse population (i.e. construction professionals) as a single entity. A good justification for this would be if the unit of analysis were a project, in which the interconnectedness of participants’ roles is established and evaluation of perceptions and experiences can occur with a view to informing how the planning and management of project teams can be improved to alleviate stress.
   The approach adopted in the current study of measuring both perceptions of importance and frequency of experience of stressors and moderators was successful when the five highest ranked items in each scale are compared. Different items emerged in the Job Demand and Job Support scales and the top five items were ranked in a different order in all three scales. Although the differences were minor, the research demonstrated that there appear to be differences between perception and experience and this is something that should be carefully considered in the design of future scales. The use of ‘impact scores’ to re-weight rankings was a successful analytical tool in that it elevated the ranking of two items in the Job Support scale, which would have otherwise have been suppressed. Finally, although many of the additional items introduced to the scales used in Bowen et al. (2013) were arguably unnecessary, several of them were included in the five highest ranking items in all three of the scales used in the current study. This leads to the conclusion that established and validated scales should be used if they are known to measure what is being studied. If scales are developed for a study in a context where no validated scales exist, they should be constructed rigorously and accompanied by qualitative instruments capable of capturing issues through open-ended questioning. The research confirms the applicability of using the JDC-S framework, which found the main stressors, control and support moderators to be largely consistent with the findings of previous studies.
Acknowledgements
The Grantholder acknowledges that opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in any publication generated by the NRF-supported research are those of the authors, and that the NRF accepts no liability whatsoever in this regard.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
Funding
This work is based on research supported by the National Research Foundation of South Africa [Grant (UID) 85376].
References
Adams, A. and Tancred, P. (2000) Designing Women: Gender and the Architectural Profession, University of Toronto Press, Toronto.
African Development Bank. (2014) Comparing the Real Size of African Economies: Results of the 2011 International Comparison Program for Africa, African Development Bank, Abidjan, available at http://bit.ly/ADB2014rep.
Aldwin, C.M., Sutton, K.J., Chiara, G. and Spiro, A. (1996) Age differences in stress, coping, and appraisal: findings from the normative aging study. Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 5IB(4), P179–88.
Anthony, K.H. (2001) Designing for Diversity: Gender, Race, and Ethnicity in the Architectural Profession, University of Illinois Press, Urbana, IL.
Bowen, P.A., Edwards, P.J. and Lingard, H. (2013) Workplace stress experienced by construction professionals in South Africa. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 139(4), 393–403.
Bowen, P.A., Edwards, P.J., Lingard, H. and Cattell, K.S. (2014) Predictive modeling of workplace stress among construction professionals. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 140(3), 04013055.
Caven, V. (2004) Constructing a career: women architects at work. Career Development International, 9(5), 518–31.
Chan, I.Y.S., Leung, M.-Y. and Yu, S.S.W. (2012) Managing the stress of Hong Kong expatriate construction professionals in mainland China: focus group study exploring individual coping strategies and organizational support. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 138 (10), 1150–60.
Chartered Institute of Building. (2006) Occupational Stress in the Construction Industry, Chartered Institute of Building, London.
Cooper, C.L., Solan, S. and Williams, P. (1988) Occupational Stress Indicator Management Guide, NFER-Nelson, Windsor.
Corder, G.W. and Foreman, D.I. (2014) Nonparametric Statistics: A Step-by-step Approach, Wiley, Hoboken, NJ.
Council for the Built Environment. (2013) CBE Quarterly Report: Quarter 1 (1 April 2013–30 June 2013) – Extract, Annexure C Professional Councils’ Report, Council for the Built Environment, Pretoria.
Cox, T. (1993) Stress Research and Stress Management: Putting Theory to Work (Report No. 61/1993), available at http:// bit.ly/CoxReport61.
Cox, T. and Griffiths, A. (2005) The nature and measurement of work-related stress: theory and practice, in Wilson, J.R. and Corlett, N. (eds.) Evolution of Human Work, 3rd edn, CRS Press, London, pp. 553–71.
Dainty, A.R.J., Neale, R.H. and Bagilhole, B.M. (2000) Comparison of men’s and women’s careers in U.K. construction industry. Journal of Professional Issues in Engineering Education and Practice, 126(3), 110–5.
Dainty, A.R.J., Bagilhole, B.M. and Neale, R.H. (2000) A grounded theory of women’s career under-achievement in large UK construction companies. Construction Management and Economics, 18(2), 239–50. De Graft-Johnson, A., Manley, S. and Greed, C. (2005) Diversity or the lack of it in the architectural profession. Construction Management and Economics, 23, 1035–43.
De Haas, S., Timmerman, G. and Ho¨ing, M. (2009) Sexual harassmentandhealthamongmaleandfemalepoliceofficers. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 14(4), 390–401.
Demerouti, E., Bakker, A.B., Nachreiner, F. and Schaufeli, W.B. (2001) The job demands-resources model of burnout. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86(3), 499–512.
Department of Higher Education and Training. (2014) Call for Comments on the National Scarce Skills List: Top 100 OccupationsinDemand.GovernmentGazette,Notice380,Department ofHigherEducationandTraining,RepublicofSouthAfrica, available at http://bit.ly/SAScarceSkills2014.
DepartmentofLabour.(2005)WomenintheSouthAfricanLabour Market 1995–2005, Chief Directorate of Communication, Department of Labour, Republic of South Africa, Pretoria.
Djebarni, R. (1996) The impact of stress in site management effectiveness. Construction Management and Economics, 14 (4), 281–93.
Dollard, M.F., Opie, T., Lenthall, S., Wakerman, J., Knight, S., Dunn, S., Rickard, G. and MacLeod, M. (2012) Psychosocial safety climate as an antecedent of work characteristics and psychological strain: a multilevel model. Work and Stress, 26(4), 385–404.
European Agency for Safety and Health at Work. (2009) OSH in Figures: Stress at Work – Facts and Figures, Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg.
European Agency for Safety and Health at Work. (2014) Calculating the Cost of Work-related Stress and Psychosocial Risks, Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg, pp. 34–7.
European Commission. (2002) Guidance on Work-related Stress: Spice of Life or Kiss of Death, European Commission, Luxenbourg.
Frese, M. (1987) A concept of control: implications for stress and performance in human–computer interaction, in Salvendy, G., Sauter, S.L. and Hurrell, J.J. Jr. (eds.) Second International Conference on Human–Computer Interaction, Elsevier, Honolulu, August, 10–14, pp. 43–50.
Ganster, D. (1989) Measurement of Worker Control, Final report to the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health. Contract No. 88-79187, Atlanta, GA.
Goldenhar, L.M., Swanson, N.G., Hurrell, J.J. Jr., Ruder, A. and Deddens, J. (1998) Stressors and adverse outcomes for female construction workers. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 3(1), 19–32.
Haynes, N.S. and Love, P.E.D. (2004) Psychological adjustment and coping among construction project managers. Construction Management and Economics, 22(2), 129–40.
Ibem, E.O., Anosike, M.N., Azuh, D.E. and Mosaku, T.O. (2011) Work stress among professionals in the building construction industry in Nigeria. Australasian Journal of Construction Economics and Building, 11(3), 45–57.
Jex, S.M. (1998) Stress and Job Performance: Theory, Research, and Implications for Managerial Practice, Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Johnson, J.V. and Hall, E.M. (1988) Job strain, work place social support, and cardiovascular disease: a cross-sectional study of a random sample of the Swedish working population. American Journal of Public Health, 78(10), 1336–42.
Karasek, R.A., Jr. (1979) Job demands, job decision latitude, and mental strain: implications for job redesign. Administrative Science Quarterly, 24(2), 285–308.
Karasek, R.A., Jr. (1985) Job Content Questionnaire and User’s Guide Rev 1.1, Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering,UniversityofSouthernCalifornia,LosAngeles,CA.
King, K.R. (2005) Why is discrimination stressful? The mediating role of cognitive appraisal. Cultural Diversity & Ethnic Minority Psychology, 11(3), 202–12.
Kingsley, K. and Glynn, A. (1992) Women in the architectural workplace. Journal of Architectural Education, 46(1), 1–20.
Leung, M.-Y., Bowen, P.A., Liang, Q. and Famakin, I. (2015) Development of a job-stress model for construction professionals in South Africa and Hong Kong. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 141(2), 04014077.
Leung, M.-Y. and Chan, I.Y.S. (2012) Exploring stressors of Hong Kong expatriate construction professionals in mainland China: focus group study. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 138(1), 78–88.
Leung,M.-Y.,Chan,I.Y.S.,Chong,A.M.L.andSham,J.F.-C. (2008) Developing structural integrated stressor–stress models for clients’ and contractors’ cost engineers. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 134(8), 635–43.
Leung, M.-Y., Chan, I.Y.S. and Cooper, C.L. (2015) Stress Management in the Construction Industry, Wiley, Chichester.
Leung, M.-Y., Chan, I.Y.S. and Yu, J. (2009) Integrated model for the stressors and stresses of construction project managers in Hong Kong. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 135(2), 126–34.
Leung, M.-Y., Olomolaiye, P., Chong, A.M.L. and Lam, C.C.Y. (2005) Impacts of stress on estimation performance in Hong Kong. Construction Management and Economics, 23(9), 891–903.
Leung, M.-Y., Skitmore, M. and Chan, I.Y.S. (2007) Subjective and objective stress in construction cost estimation. Construction Management and Economics, 25(10), 1063–75.
Lingard, H. and Francis, V. (2006) Does a supportive work environment moderate the relationship between workfamily conflict and burnout among construction professionals? Construction Management and Economics, 24(2), 185–96.
Lingard, H., Francis, V. and Turner, M. (2012) Work time demands, work time control and supervisor support in the Australian construction industry: An analysis of workfamily interaction. Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 19(6), 647–65.
Loosemore, M. and Waters, T. (2004) Gender differences in occupational stress among professionals in the construction industry. Journal of Management in Engineering, 20(3), 126–32.
Love, P.E.D., Edwards, D.J. and Irani, Z. (2010) Work stress, support, and mental health in construction. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 136(6), 650–8.
Marmot, M. and Wilkinson, R.G. (2006) Social Determinants of Health, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Martin,P.andBarnard, A.(2013) The experienceofwomen in male-dominated occupations: a constructivist grounded theory inquiry. SA Journal of Industrial Psychology, 39(2), 1–12.
Mayo, M., Sanchez, J.I., Pastor, J.C. and Rodriguez, A. (2012) Supervisor and coworker support: a source congruence approach to buffering role conflict and physical stressors. The International Journal of Human Resource Management, 23(18), 3872–89.
McTernan, W.P., Dollard, M.F. and LaMontagne, A.D. (2013) Depression in the workplace: an economic cost analysis of depression-related productivity loss attributable to job strain and bullying. Work and Stress, 27(4), 321–38.
Melia´, J.L. and Becerril, M. (2007) Psychosocial sources of stress and burnout in the construction sector: a structural equation model. Psicothema, 19(4), 679–86.
Michie, S. (2002) Causes and management of stress at work. Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 59(1), 67–72.
Mostert, K., Peeters, M. and Rost, I. (2011) Work-home interference and the relationship with job characteristics and well-being: a South African study among employees in the construction industry. Stress and Health, 27, e238–51.
Ng, T.S., Skitmore, M.R. and Leung, T.K.C. (2005) Manageability of stress among construction project participants. Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 12 (3), 264–82.
Patton, M.Q. (2002) Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods, 3rd edn, Sage, London.
Pett, M.A. (1997) Nonparametric Statistics for Health Care Research: Statistics for Small Samples and Unusual Distributions, Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Pinto, J.K., Dawood, S. and Pinto, M.B. (2014) Project management and burnout: implications of the demand– control–support model on project-based work. International Journal of Project Management, 32, 578–89.
Poon, S.W., Rowlinson, S.M., Koh, T. and Deng, Y. (2013) Job burnout and safety performance in the Hong Kong construction industry. International Journal of Construction Management, 13(1), 69–78.
Republic of South Africa. (1996) Constitution of the Republic of South Africa (Act 108 of 1996), available at http://bit.ly/ SA_Constitution_1996.
Republic of South Africa. (2000) Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Act (Act 5 of 2000), available at http://bit.ly/ PrefProcPolFrAct.
Republic of South Africa. (2013) Broad-based Black Economic Empowerment Amendment Act (Act 46 of 2013), available at http://bit.ly/BBBEEAmendAct.
Sale, J.E.M. and Kerr, M.S. (2002) The psychometric properties of Karasek’s demand and control scales within a single sector: data from a large teaching hospital. International Archives of Occupational and Environmental Health, 75(3), 145–52.
Sang, K.J.C., Dainty, A.R.J. and Ison, S.G. (2007) Gender: a risk factor for occupational stress in the architectural profession? Construction Management and Economics, 25(12), 1305–17.
Sauter, S.L., Hurrell, J.J., Jr. and Cooper, C.L. (eds.) (1989) Job Control and Worker Health. Wiley Series on Studies in Occupational Stress, Wiley, Chichester.
Schieman, S. and Reid, S. (2009) Job authority and health: unraveling the competing suppression and explanatory influences. Social Science and Medicine, 69(11), 1616–24.
Statistics South Africa. (2014a) Gross Domestic Product: Statistical Release PO441, Statistics South Africa, Pretoria, p. 31. Statistics South Africa. (2014b) Quarterly Labour Force Survey, Statistical Release PO211, Statistics South Africa, Pretoria, p. 23.
Stenman, J., Wennstro¨m, J.L. and Abrahamsson, K.H. (2010) Dental hygienists’ views on communicative factors and interpersonal processes in prevention and treatment of periodontal disease. International Journal of Dental Hygiene, 8(3), 213–8.
Sutherland, V. and Davidson, M.J. (1989) Stress among construction site managers: a preliminary study. Stress Medicine, 5(4), 221–35.
Taylor, S.E. (2008) Fostering a supportive environment at work. The Psychologist-Manager Journal, 11(2), 265–83.
Whitman, P. (2005) Going Places: Career Progression of Women in the Architectural Profession, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane.
Yip, B., Rowlinson, S. and Siu, O.L. (2008) Coping strategies as moderators in the relationship between role overload and burnout. Construction Management and Economics, 26
(8), 869–80.

   

   

   
702	Cattell et al.
   
Workplace stress	701
   

   
