Construction Management and Economics (1996) 14, 395-404
Interpersonal communication in cost planning during the building design phase
PAUL A. BOWEN I * AND PETER J. EDWARDS 2
Department of Construction Economics and Management, University of Cape Town, Rondebosch 7700, Cape Town, South Africa and 2Department of Building and Construction Economics, Royal Melboume Institute of Technoloo, Melboume, Victoria 3001, Australia
Received 7 June 1994; accepted 15 February 1 996
Effective interpersonal communication is critically important in the design phase of a building project if a successful design brief is to be formulated and appropriate cost advice prepared. This paper explores the latter process in the context of communication theory, using structured interview surveys of building clients, architects and quantity surveyors in South Africa.
Keywords: Communication, cost planning, quantity surveyors.
　
Introduction
The building industry exists in a dynamic and fragmented environment, with individual building project teams often consisting of ad hoc combinations of clients, architects, quantity surveyors and contractors. "I*hese combinations of project participants are closely bound by a mutual information dependency, as information is required and produced during all the phases of the building procurement process from inception to completion.
　Information may be defined as data which have been processed and presented in a format which gives them meaning. Inforrnation technology is concerned with the collection and collation of data leading to the automated production of usable information. Clearly, current developments in information technology, for example those concerned with integrated communication networks and advanced media technologies, have enormous import for the collection, processing and
 paper was finalised whilst Paul Bowen was on sabbatical leave and was Visiting Research Fellow to the Department of Building and Construction Economics, Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology, Australia.
0144-6193 0 1996 E & FN spon
dissemination of information within the building industry (Atkin, 1986; Chang and Emsoff, 1988; Baldwin, 1990).
　The literature reflects a concem for the technological aspects of information transfer, focusing, inter alia, on the derivation of information from raw data for a specific need and the efficient storage and retrieval of such inforrnation. Little attention has been given to the interpersonal communication of information and the effectiveness of that communication process. Effecrive interpersonal communication is essential. Effcient information transfer technology and information management systems do not, in themselves, comprise the sole ing•edients for decision support in the design phase of building procurement.
　This paper is concerned with the effectiveness of cost planning communication during the design phase of the building procurement process. More specifically, it deals with communication aspects of quantity surveyors' engagement letters and service ag•eements, clients' design briefs, the language of building cost planning and cost planning messages. The context is that of a professional quantity surveyor engaged to provide consultancy services. An analysis is given of the communication sources, receivers, media of transmission, messages, barriers to communication and feedback mechanisms associated with the provision of cost-related inforrnation. The study documents the results of an interview survey concerning the opinions of clients, architects and quantity surveyors.
Models of human communication
Communication is defined as the process of interaction bet%.veen individuals in which meaning is created and shared (Cherry, 1978). Various models have been developed to explain the communication process. Examples include those developed by Lasswell (1948), Shannon and Weaver (1949), Johnson (1951), Feldberg (1975) and Tubbs and Moss (1981).
　Feldberg (1975) produced a model which encapsulates the majority of the concepts necessary' for an analysis of the communication of cost planning information. The model is linear and mechanistic in nature and assumes a simple two-person communication process. The relevant components are the original sender, the final receiver, the message, the medium, sender expectations, receiver reactions, the result and the direction and content of the message.
　　The sender communicates the message to the receiver with some objective in mind. This objective may be conscious or unconscious, structured or unstructured and is translated into the sender's expectations. The message is transmitted to and received by the final receiver, who reacts in some way to the message. The sender's expectation (anticipated result) and receiver's reaction (actual result) are translated into a result. Whether or not the receiver's reaction conforms to the sender's expectation depends on many factors, the aim  of the communication process being to ensure that the sender's expectation and receiver's reaction are as congruent as possible. Prior to transmission, the sender should know the identity of the receiver if the correct expectations are to be established.
　Congruency occurs when sender expectation and receiver reaction coincide, but the extent of the degee of congruency is affected by the direction, medium and content of the message. Congruency is also influenced by the 'biographical' status of the participants in the communication process, whereby factors such as age, age difference, ethnicity, gender, education level, experience and knowledge base (and many others) may each be important (Schutz, 1970).
　The direction of the message refers to the route taken by the sender in transmitting the message, whilst the medium refers to the means used to transmit the message. T'he sender should select the most effective method for transmission, the choice depending on the availability of appropriate media, the content of the message, the nature of the receiver and the distance between sender and receiver.
　The message transmitted by the sender will possess content or information. 'Ihe exact content will be influenced by the direction of the message, the nature of the receiver, the nature of the medium and by the objectives of the sender. It might be contended that a message only contains information if it connibutes to the receiver's knowledge. However, this is to deny that all coherent message content is inforrnation which is valued in some way by the receiver. People are likely to assign the highest value to information which is new and conu•ibutes to their store of knowledge. Value can also be assigned to information which confirms knowledge already held. However, little value will be assigned to message information which is redundant to the receiver's needs. In the context of cost planning, the receiver will value inforrnation which most effectively supports decision making.
　Potential barriers to the effective communication of cost planning information exist in many forms. One such example would be where the architect acts as information 'gatekeeper' in communication between the client and the quantity surveyor. Message distortion is likely to occur where there is an absence of direct communication. Failure to acknowledge the presence of such barriers and to adopt appropriate pro-active action, may result in the suboptimal creation of shared meaning.
　Noise constitutes another barrier to effective communication, when the clarity of the message is adversely affected, either by extraneous or conflicting content in the message itself or by interference in the channel of communication (e.g. a poor telephone line or a weak print resolution on a fax message). Symbolism is a unique form of noise and occurs in the decoding of the message content. It may be intentional or unintentional, positive or negative and occurs when
Table I Characteristics of the idealized communication of cost planning messages

Minimal barriers to effective communication
Effective use of feedback mechanisms High empathy and sensitivity to audience
Appropriate use of terminology
Appropriate levels of abstraction
Written messages supplemented with oral explanation
Mutual appreciation of participants' roles
Absence of defence mechanisms
Minimal message distortion
Proactive quantity surveyor involvement High quality interpersonal communication
Minimal uncertainty
Maximization of shared meaning
The message sent is the message received

the intended meaning of the message is understood by the receiver as being symbolic of a different or additional meaning. For example, the message from the quantity surveyor to the architect 'Do not contact me before 12 noon' may be interpreted literally by the receiver as simply reporting the unavailability of the sender. Conversely, it may be decoded as an unintended (or even intended) symbol of the sender's negative feelings about their relationship.
　The responsibility lies with the quantity surveyor (as sender) to adopt a positive, pro-active role in the communication of cost planning messages. The characteristics of the idealized communication of these messages are depicted in Table I (Bowen, 1993).
The communication of cost planning information during the design phase
One of the main functions of the design phase is for the client to communicate to the professional advisers his or her needs and objectives in initiating the project. The consultants, in turn, must interpret the client's needs, prepare a general outline of the client's requirements and formulate and execute a set of actions to best satisfy those needs. "I*he principal activities of the quantity surveyor during this phase include establishing the cost advisory services to be provided, receiving and commenting on the client's brief and advising on design/cost outcomes and alternatives and cost—quality relationships.
　The quantity surveyor must establish the extent of the cost advice services to be provided and the nature and scope of the project. It is essential that the client, architect and quantity surveyor are ad idem on these issues. Furthermore, it is desirable that the language used in the communication process is similarly understood by the various participants. The mechanisms traditionally employed to achieve this mutual understanding are the quantity surveyor's engagement documentation and the client's brief. The effectiveness of the communication processes associated with these media forrn a focus of this paper.
　The recipients of cost planning messages are likely to operate at a level of abstraction different to that of the quantity surveyor. Such messages invariably involve the communication of technical information, so the message per se should ideally be accompanied by an explanatory covering letter or report. The covering letter should be compiled with the recipient in mind, avoiding the excessive use of technical terms and jargon. The cost planning message, in addition to communicating the essential cost information, should be explicit in its u•eatment of factors such as the quality specification of the proposed project, the uncertainty attached to any cost plan, current market conditions, the cost model used, the source of the cost data, and the cost indices used for adjustment purposes. In other words, the receiver should be provided with suffcient information to possess a holistic understanding of the cost planning message, the intention being to achieve shared meaning, thus ensuring that project decision making is fully inforrned. The medium of transmission should be suited to the sophistication and decoding ability of the receiver. For example, the use of pie charts and histograms may be appropriate in the provision of comparative elemental cost data to architects. In this instance, congruence of meaning is sought by assuming that visual, graphic expressions of cost planning information will be more readily understood by a recipient experienced in these types of media. For a client's accountant, on the other hand, congruence may be better achieved through the use of spreadsheet tables. The conventional practice of simply sending the original message to the client, copied to the architect, may be ill advised. Two separate messages, compiled using different communication media, may be more appropriate.
　In addition to receiving the messages in written form, recipients should be provided with an oral explanation of the content. Not only is this approach likely to enhance receiver understanding, but it will also permit the quantity surveyor to monitor receiver reaction, thus providing a means of assessing the degree of congruence. The use of feedback mechanisms provides a powerful tool for the attainrnent of shared meaning.
　According to Feldberg (1975), the main responsibility for ensuring that expectations and reactions are congruent lies with the sender or originator of the message, i.e. the quantity surveyor. To facilitate the attainment of congruence, it is the sender's responsibility to ensure that the appropriate receiver is selected, che most appropriate medium is chosen, the message contains the correct content and that there are no barriers inhibiting the ability of the receiver to accept the message.
　Young (1986), in an evaluation of written communication in auditing, suggested general rules to enhance the effectiveness of written communication in the auditing environment. In summary, these rules may be listed as follows.
 The message content left to inference should be minimal.
(2) The language used should be unambiguous in context.
(3) Words or phrases at a high level of abstraction should not be used.
(4) Words should be used denotatively rather than connotatively.
(5) Alternative channels should be used to facilitate receiver understanding where necessary.
(6) Writing should be brief, clear and concise.
(7) Synonyms should be avoided, favouring the repetition of the same word where the same meaning is intended.
　These rules apply no less to the communication of information by the quantity surveyor and the rest of the design team in the attainment of shared meaning.
The interview survey
An interview survey, conducted in the Western Cape Region of South A.fiica, was used to deterrnine the effectiveness of the communication process associated with the provision of cost planning information (Bowen, 1993).
　A sample of ten practising quantity surveyors, ten architects and ten client offcials were interviewed. 'The quantity surveying and architectural respondents constitute small to medium-sized practices, predominantly involved in commercial projects in the private sector. Client organizations comprise institutions wielding considerable financial influence in the property development market. The interviews were structured, using a forrnal questionnaire and were conducted on a face-to-face basis. Interviews were conducted in interviewees' own offces. The interviewer filled in the interviewees' responses and made additional notes when applicable. Interviewees were cooperative and the interviews were conducted in a friendly, congenial atrnosphere. External interruptions were minimal. In general the interviewees appeared to understand the intent and meaning of individual questions, but where doubt or misunderstanding existed, the interviewer explained the question. Care was taken by the interviewer not to impart bias to the interviewee. The length of each interview was approximately I hr.
　Participants were questioned about their opinions on engagement letters and service ageements, the client's brief, and cost plans.
Engagement letters and service agreements
In accepting a professional appointment, the quantity surveyor should write a formal letter of acceptance to the client, formalizing their contractual relationship and defining the respective obligations and responsibilities of the parties. The objectives of such engagement documentation should therefore include ensuring client awareness and acceptance of the scope of the cost planning services to be provided by the quantity surveyor, ensuring client awareness and acceptance of client responsibilities vzs-å-vis the provision by the client of cost-related information, and establishing the basis for remuneration. Misunderstandings and unfulfilled expectations on the part of the client are likely to result if these aspects are not comprehensively dealt with at the start of a project.
　nie Association of South African Quantity Surveyors (ASAQS), unlike, for example, the South African Institute of Chartered Accountants (SAICA) (1983), possesses neither a set policy in respect of engagement letters nor a specimen engagement letter for the 3.1idance of members on the content and form of engagement letters. The ASAQS has, however, produced a Client—Quantity Surveyor (Private Sector) Ageement (Association of South African Quantity Surveyors, 1986) which, in keeping with the regulations promulgated under the Quantity Surveyors Act (Act No. 36 of 1970), sets out the basic range of services which constitute a norrnal commission. In addition to the basic services mentioned above, the agreement lists special services which qualifr for separate (additional) fees over and above the recommended schedule of fees. The provision of cost estimates and the preparation of a basic cost plan are listed in the agreement as fonning part of the basic services.
　Pre-design viability studies, cost planning, cost analyses and cost control are specifically listed as constituting special services. Furtherrnore, the agreement is unequivocal that special services shall only be provided by prior agreement between the client and the quantity surveyor and shall be confirmed in writing by the quantity surveyor to the client, stating the scope of the services required and the related fees with each special service commissioned (Assocation of South African Quantity Surveyors, 1986). 'Ihe Ag•eement does not distinguish between cost advice falling within basic and special services. For example, note the apparent conflict between the provision of a 'basic cost plan' (basic service) and 'cost planning' (special service). Definitions of the various terms are not given. Thus, the seeds of poor communication are potentially sown early in the engagement process.
　Insofar as basic serv'ices are concemed and unlike the statutory audit services performed by auditors in terms of the Companies Act (Act No.61 of 1973), the quantity surveyor is not prohibited from reducing or limiting the services provided in any way, subject always to the dangers of negligent conduct and client dissatisfaction. This caveat applies equally to the provision of special services.
　As the services (basic or special) rendered by the quantity surveyor are not governed by statute in South Africa and in the absence of the use of the it is particularly important that the respective responsibilities and obligations of the parties be set out in an engagement letter or service agreement.
　The survey showed that engagement documents are seen as performing a worthwhile function. The Agreement (Association of South African Quantity Surveyors, 1986) is not in widespread use, with clients frequently using their own forrns of agreement or engagement letter. However, architects seldom receive a copy of the engagement document, giving rise to doubts regarding their appreciation of the scope of the quantity surveyor's commission. Quantity surveyors tend to assume that recipients have understood the content of engagement documentation and take few steps to assist them. Moreover, quantity surveyors fail to satisfr themselves of recipient understanding of the documents. This is a barrier to effective communication. Quantity surveyors appear to be unaware of the applicable communication principles affecting message fidelity and are misguided about the benefits to be derived from the use of standardized or model engagement documentation. -rhe regular use of standardized documents may be indicative of a lack of appreciation of individual client's needs and abilities. Indeed, given that recipients possess different cornrnunication skills and decoding abilities it could be argued that standardization might actually militate against recipient understanding. Face-to-face discussions would help promote effective communication. Other methods might include partners checking each other's engagement letters, tailor-making an engagement document to suit the client, and responding to specific queries (Young, 1986).
　Nearly half of the surveyed clients claimed the presence of a symbolic message, attempting to limit the quantity surveyor's responsibility and accountability, in engagement documentation. Clearly, this is unsatisfactory from a communication point of view, amounting to the inn•oduction of a 'noise' factor into the communication process, thereby reducing the possibility of congruent expectations and reactions between sender and receiver. In this case, the receiver (i.e. client) perceives the quantity surveyor's statement as symbolic of some other underlying intent. For example, a quantity surveyor may include, in an engagement letter, a statement to the effect that only services '"x" and "y" will be provided', intending to convey a factual statement about the extent of the commission. The client, however, may perceive this negatively as some secretive attempt to disclaim responsibility should diffculties arise at a later stage. Unintentional symbolism in messages constitutes noise and has the potential to interfere with, distort or degrade the sender's real meaning. Intentional symbolism, on the other hand, can also contribute to noise if the receiver does not fully share the sender's symbol interpretation code.
　The research survey has thus shown that communication difficulties can arise as early as the initial process of consultant engagement. Given that this process provides the skeleton framework on which the ensuing cost advice will be based, professional quantity surveyors should be concerned that this framework is not suffciently robust when seen from a communication point of view.
The client's brief
The client's brief represents the initial formulation of the •mind model' of the project held by the client. preparation of the outline brief (message) by the client is important because the quality of the brief impacts on the quality of the solutions proposed by the design team. At the project inception stage it provides a mechanism for providing the quantity surveyor and architect with information necessary for the compilation of cost plans. Moreover, the process of compiling a rigorous outline brief assists the client in clarifring needs and objectives, priorities and commitrnent to the acquisition of a building.
　O'Reilly (1987) contended that the functions of the brief cover a wide range and constitute a medium of instruction for conveying information and decisions between the client and the design team, (2) a means of stimulating communication, which should facilitate the attainment of shared meaning, (3) a record of the decision-making process, which should ensure continuity and consistency and (4) a tool for evaluation, embodying the aims, resources and context against which the designs can be evaluated.
　For the purposes of cost planning and control, the objectives and prerequisites of the initial brief are identified by O'Reilly (1973) as the following.

(I) Identifying the purpose of the project, stressing desired ends and priorities rather than possible means of achieving those ends.
(2) Encompassing all existing information, being as complete as possible for cost estimating purposes in relation to the stage of the design process.
(3) Presenting a logical and appropriate structure which indicates its purpose, stating functional and performance requirements rather than design specifications.
(4) Explicitly considering consu•aining factors such as time, budget limitations, accommodation and quality specifications.
(5) Presenting an explicit statement of the scope and limitations of the brief.
(6) Providing sufficient specificity for decisionmaking purposes, but possessing enough flexibility to encourage exploration of problems and options.
(7) Providing appropriate administrative information about the client which is likely to be relevant to efficient briefing.
　Given the importance of the client's brief as a guiding document throughout the initial stages of the design process, it should be conveyed to the quantity surveyor in as meaningful a manner as possible. This may not be the case in the event of a poorly prepared brief. The Bactice Manual of the Institute of South African Architects (ISAA, 1989) does not contain guidelines for brief elicitation, nor does it comment on the characteristics of a comprehensive brief.
　From the survey findings it appears that architects and quantity surveyors do not always receive a written copy of the client's brief. Briefing meetings are the usual method by which architects are made aware of the client's requirements. Quantity surveyors do not always attend such briefing meetings. The fact that quantity surveyors (and architects) do not always receive a written brief from clients and that quantity surveyors are not always present at briefing meetings is clearly unsatisfactory from a communication viewpoint. Notwithstanding the apparent lack of use of a written brief on the part of clients, the majority of respondents appear to consider the brief to perform a worthwhile function and view it in a positive fashion. Clearly, respondents recognize the importance of the brief as a means of communication.
　The survey showed that clients and architects tend to assume quantity surveyor understanding of the brief. They also tend to refrain from taking steps to assist quantity surveyors to understand the brief and fail to satisfy themselves of quantity surveyor understanding. In the interests of effective communication, clients and architects should therefore be more pro-active in facilitating quantity surveyor understanding of the brief.
　Few quantity' surveyors reported the use of a proforma brief by clients, but the majority consider that their ability to understand the brief would be enhanced by receiving it in this format. The desirability of &iis approach from a communication viewpoint is questionable. It is clear that, whilst the client's brief is seen by the majority of respondents as a representation of che client's needs and expectations in respect of the proposed project, respondents unanimously agree that the 'brief' is an evolutionary process and not always susceptible to a standardized, pro-forrna approach.
　Most of the survey interviewees considered the client's brief to represent (symbolize) the distillation of the client's requirements in respect of the proposed project. Unintended symbolism did not appear to be a mapr concern, but they saw the brief as a representation of the client's needs subject to qualifications such as the following.
(l) The extent to which the brief represents the client's needs is a function of client sophisticau on.
(2) Clients do not always know what they want at the initial stages of the project. The brief can thus be seen as a representation of needs at a specific point in time.
(3) The brief is a 'living concept'. It is initially uncertain, providing a good basis for preliminary discussion and development in an evolutionary manner.
(4) The brief represents a source of information and is an essential communication instrument.
Building cost plans
"Ihe provision of cost information is listed as a basic service in terms of the Client—Quantity Surveyor Agreement (Association of South African Quantity Surveyors, 1986), the raison d'étre being to provide information on the cost implications of design decisions (Skitrnore and Patchell, 1990). However, apart from the Guide to Elemental Cost Analysis (Association of South African Quanity Surveyors, 1982), there is little other information or guidelines available regarding the content and format of such cost messages and their associated explanatory letters at the various stages of the design process. The usefulness of the Guide to Elemental Cost Analysis is limited to the measurement rules and scope of work associated with the various design elements and components of the building and it is applicable only after the point in the design process where these are individually identifiable. The same can be said of the Standard System for the Measurement of Builders' Work (Assocation of South African Quantity Surveyors, 1991), used in the preparation of bills of quantities for tender stage cost estimating purposes. Given the fact that various types of estimating methods, using different forrns of cost data, are often employed at different stages throughout the design process (Bowen, 1993), the lack of published guidelines is of particular concern as it risks creating a communication 'gap' and a failure to achieve shared meaning.
　The purpose of a cost plan, together with the associated explanatory covering letter or report, is to communicate cost advice and, at another level, to attain shared meaning and exert influence (Bowen, 1993). The objectives and prerequisites of such documents and their covering letters are therefore to.
( l) Identify the intended receiver to whom the cost plan is addressed.
(2) Inform the receiver of the anticipated cost of the building in some appropriate level of detail. The most appropriate medium of transmission should be chosen. The cost plan should be qualified in terms of the purpose and scope (inclusions and exclusions), date, quality specification and construction programme. In
addition, the anticipated costs at both tender and completion stages should be given.
(3) Ensure an appreciation of the weaknesses of the cost plan. More specifically, the receiver needs to be informed about those matters about which the quantity surveyor has had to make assumptions and the nature of those assumptions.
(4) Minimize receiver misunderstanding of the cost plan by using more than one medium of transmission and a feedback mechanism for evaluating the extent of congruent meaning.
(5) Ensure an appreciation of the potential cost consequences of the 'weaknesses' of the cost plan, together with recommendations for any corrective action.
(6) Provide constructive recommendations regarding comparative design economics and the construction programme.
(7) Provide an acknowledgement of che presence of risk and uncertainty together with a quantification of the extent of the risk factors.
(8) Indicate the degree of responsibility and accountability assurned by the quantity surveyor for the information contained in the cost plan.
(9) Identify the information upon which the cost plan is based (e.g., drawings, cost data and building cost/price indices).
(10) Identify the estimating method(s) employed.
(l l) Justify the assumptions made in the deterrnination of factors such as escalation rates and preliminaries allowances.
(12) Express opinions (qualified or unqualified) regarding the cost advice provided.
　Poor communication may be the consequence of a cost plan not achieving these objectives, resulting in misunderstanding, suboptimal shared meaning and, consequently, inappropriate design decisions. Ideally, the quantity surveyor should provide an oral explanation of the cost plan on a face-to-face basis in addition to a well-formulated written message.
　The interview survey addressed a number of communication issues arising out of quantity surveyors' cost planning processes. One of these is the use of the language of cost planning. Cost planning is essentially a technical process and, consequently, quantity surveyors should be mindful of the fact that architects and clients may not be well versed in the technical meaning of terms relating to building costs. To maximize the transference of meaning, quantity surveyors should structure their cost messages according to the receiver's level of technical understanding. Participants in the survey were therefore asked to comment on the extent to which the language of cost messages (involving terrninology such
as 'preliminaries', 'escalation' and 'elemental') is similarly understood by the various parties.
　None of the respondents thought that the language of building cost messages is similarly understood by everyone. Nearly all quantity surveyors and architects agreed that such language is similarly understood by themselves. They also agreed that clients do not nornally share the same understanding, although they conceded that the level of understanding is a function of client sophistication. For example, institutional clients often have their own property development divisions, staffed by people with relevant professional qualifications.
　Clients, on the other hand, considered that while their understanding of the language of building cost messages was on a par with that of architects, it was at a slightly lower level than that of quantity surveyors.
　This dissimilarity in understanding the language of cost planning has the potential to affect communication effectiveness in two ways. Firstly, it is unlikely that congruency of meaning between sender and receiver will be achieved if the language is differently understood. Secondly, language is symbolic of underlying events and activities (Young, 1986). 'I'hus, differences in comprehending the language of building cost messages may mean that the participants possess different understandings of the principles and practices which underlie the events and activities that constitute the cost simulation process. For example, clients and quantity surveyors may hold different perceptions of the gross area of the building; quantity surveyors would perceive the goss area as being the building area measured over external walls, whereas clients may well think of gross area as the floor area measured up to the internal face of the external walls and somehow related to rentable area. Architects, following particular town planning ordinances, may use yet another interpretation of gross area.
　None of the 3() respondents thought that communication effectiveness would be improved if the language contained more technical terms. Several actually advocated the use of fewer technical terms, commenting that this would help to facilitate the following.
(I) Make cost plans more understandable to recipients and clarify' the definition of the tet7•ns in use.
(2) Minimize the use of technical 'jargon' and the confusion its usage creates. For example, confusion surrounds the use of the term 'budget'.
(3) Break down barriers created by the use of technical language.
(4) Make the language more descriptive, but less technical.
　However, most interviewees asserted that the terms in use are broadly understood at present and that clients are growing in sophistication.
　All interviewees claimed to hold a positive attitude to cost plans. Moreover, quantity surveyors are of the unanimous opinion that clients and architects view cost planning positively.
　Half of the client and architect interviewees reported that quantity surveyors do not take steps to assist their understanding of cost plans, except for responding to specific queries. Other interviewees stated that any explanatory information is presented to them orally at a meeting, with the quantity surveyor responding to specific questions. Overall, it appears that quantity surveyors are generally reactive in this matter, waiting for the receiver to ask for information, and failing to make pro-active suggestions about cost anomalies and design changes.
　Another important factor in building cost communication is the use of symbolism. All 30 interviewees considered that cost information symbolizes the quantity surveyor's interpretation of the anticipated cost of the project. However, several respondents perceived additional, possibly unintended, symbolism in the costrelated messages. In their opinion, cost information does the following.
(l) It acts as an integral part of the design discipline from a cost planning and control point of view.
(2) It is a function of how well the quantity surveyor interprets the anticipated cost.
(3) It is indicative of the thoroughness of the quantity surveyor. The first cost plan is seen as being crucial as it places a ceiling figure on the project cost.
(4) It is indicative of the confidence that can be placed in the cost plan.
(5) It represents a marketing tool in that it is a vehicle for the practice to display its expertise in this field.
　Cost plans clearly convey symbolic, possibly unintended, messages to clients and architects (e.g., that the cost plan places a ceiling limit on the project cost). This is undesirable from a communication point of
tnew.
　A critical issue concerns whether or not communicants perceive certain important features of cost planning information to be explicitly stated or implied in building cost-related messages. Three out of ten quantity surveyors considered that the quality specification of the proposed project is implied by the cost plan as opposed to being explicitly stated. This sentiment was shared by the majority of the clients and architects interviewed. Interestingly, all quantity surveyors and most clients and architects thought that the quality specification should be explicitly conveyed to users. Clearly, cost plans often imply the message of quality specification rather than stating it. 'Ihis is undesirable from a communication viewpoint.
　All the architects interviewed agreed that the risk and uncertainty attached to cost messages is implied rather than stated. This occurs through the use of terrns such as 'estimate' and providing lists of assumptions and exclusions. The majority of quantity surveyors and clients agreed with this view. Clients claimed that quantity surveyors cover the risk and uncertainty by means of a contingency sum. At least 80% of ali interviewees asserted that risk and uncertainty should be the subject of explicit quantification. Two dissenting quantity surveyors claimed that it is suffcient to state, but not quantifr, risk and uncertainty. It appears that, in general, the risk message is implied rather than stated. This is undesirable from a communication viewpoint, particularly as it may lead the client into false impressions of certainty in key financial decisions.
　Ninety percent of all interviewees considered that cost messages implicitly convey to users that the quantity surveyor has obtained suffcient market evidence to support the opinions given. Four quantity surveyors, eight architects and five clients favoured including explicit reference to market evidence in the message. The contention here is that the majority of users would like to know the scope of the information as well as the degree of responsibility assumed by the quantity surveyor. It appears that the message relating to the sufficiency of market evidence is implied rather than stated. This is undesirable from a communication viewpoint.
　Most interviewees considered that the reasoning upon which quantity surveyors base their decisions in cost plans is implicitly conveyed. An example of explicit reasoning would be where the quantity surveyor justifies an on-cost percentage allowance for contract preliminaries by referring to the stage of the macroeconomic building cycle and the current state of that subsector of the market. However, senders and receivers of cost messages differ as to whether or not such information should be the subject of an explicit message. Receivers were in favour but only four out often quantity surveyors agreed with this view. Clearly, the users of cost plans wish the message pertaining to the reasoning upon which decisions are based to be conveyed explicitly rather than implicitly. That this is not generally the case is detrimental to effective communication.
　Interviewees unanimously ageed that information relating to the time required for tendering and construction should be explicitly stated rather than implied in cost messages. The majority of quantity surveyors do appear to convey this inforrnation explicitly, thus facilitating effective communication.
　More than 8()% of all interviewees thought that prevailing market conditions were generally only implied in cost messages and are often dealt with by simple but vague references to 'market rates' and 'current rates'. However, quantity surveyors were much less concerned than the receivers of cost messages that market conditions should be treated explicitly. This disparity militates against effective communication.
　Forty percent of interviewed quantity surveyors and clients and 50% of architects considered that the estimating method used in the preparation of the cost plans is implied rather than stated in cost messages. This is surprising given the differences in the potential accuracy of the various methods. All the architects and most clients and quantity surveyors considered that the cost estimating method should be stated rather than implied.
　Thus, the majority of the survey respondents favour explicit treatment of the cost estimating method used, but this practice is not consistently followed. This is undesirable from a communication viewpoint.
　Eight quantity surveyors and all the clients and architects reported that the sources of the cost data used in the compilation of the cost message are implied rather than explicitly stated. Often terms such as 'current bill rates' are used. Forty percent of quantity surveyors and architects and 50% of clients, considered that such information should be stated rather than implied. Such qualification can only serve to improve effective communication.
　The survey showed that quantity surveyors are reluctant to discuss or offer opinions about value in their cost messages. One of the stated objectives of cost planning is ensuring that clients receive 'value for money' (Seeley, 1983). However, all the quantity surveyors and architects and nine clients, reported that the issue of whether or not the client is receiving value for money on the project is implied rather than stated. Sixty percent of quantity surveyors and architects claimed that such information should remain implicit, offering reasons such as (I) the quantity surveyor is not capable of such an assessment, (2) value for money is a subjective assessment and (3) the quantity surveyor would need detailed information regarding the client's financial circumstances.
　Clients were marginally in favour of the explicit treatment of value, but held no particularly strong views in chis regard.
　A great majority of interviewees believed that information about the indices used in cost calculations should be made explicit in building cost messages. This means, for example, that explicit reference should be made to the particular index used, e.g., BER Building Cost Index—April 1994. That chis is sometimes not the case is detrimental to effective communication.
　In summary, all survey respondents held positive attitudes towards building cost plans. Clearly, respondents recognize the importance of cost messages as a means of communication. However, not all quantity surveyors take steps to assist users' understanding of their messages, save for responding to specific queries. It appears that quantity surveyors are generally reactive and fail to make pro-active suggestions about cost anomalies and design changes. Quantity surveyors take few active steps to satisfy themselves of user understanding. These shortcomings must be seen as barriers to effective communication.
　Recipients view cost estimates as representing the quantity surveyor's interpretation of the anticipated cost of the project. However, many claim the presence of symbolic, possibly unintended messages. This is undesirable from a communication viewpoint.
　Quantity surveyors very often imply message content rather than explicitly stating it. This is also undesirable from a communication point of view.
Conclusions
In exploring theory and practice, it has been found that, from a communication viewpoint, the cost message sent is not always the cost message received. Potential barriers to effective communication exist in the messages quantity surveyors send to clients and architects,
　There is room for improvement in the communication function of cost planning within the building industry in South Africa. The failure by the quantity surveying profession to develop an effective communication approach to the provision of cost-related information results in their lacking adequate assurance as to the fidelity of their messages. Improvement should begin as early as the communication relating to engagement letters and service agreements.
　More research needs to be directed towards the communication needs and patterns that constitute the costing processes themselves. This will necessitate an examination of the design process as well as the information needs of all the various participants in design. The communication characteristics of cost models will have to be identified and assessed. While this research has been limited to cost planning communication between quantity surveyors and their clients and architects, its findings are clearly capable of more general application within the project team.
Authors' note
Readers wishing to obtain a copy of the structured questionnaire and the detailed statistical analysis of the survey results are welcome to contact the authors.
References
Association of South African Quantity Surveyors (ASAQS) (1982) Guide to Elemental Cost Analysis, second ediöon, Building Cost Inforrnation Service, ASAQS.
Association of South African Quantity Surveyors (ASAQS) (1986) Bivaze Sector Client—Quanti5.' Suweyor Agreement, ASAQS.
Association of South African Quantity Surveyors (ASAQS) (1991) Standard System of Measuring Builders' Work, sixth edition. ASAQS.
Atkin, B. (1986) A Computer-supported Information Interchange for Construction Projects. Final Report to SERC, Deparunent of Construction Management, University of Reading.
Baldwin, A.N. (1990) Why an information technology strategy is important, Chartered Builder, 2(4), 25—27.
Bowen, P.A. (1993) A communication-based approach to price modelli.ng and price forecasting in the design phase of the  building procurement process in South Africa. Unpublished PhD Thesis, Department of Quantity Surveying, University of Port Elizabeth.
Chang, D. and Emsoff, J. (1988) Construction project management information systems a taxonomy. In Proceedings of the Project Management Institute Symposium, San Francisco, September, pp. 176—82.
Cherry, C. (1978) On Human Communication. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Feldberg, M. (1975) Organizational Behaviour: Text and Cases. Juta and Company, Cape Town.
Institute of South African Architects (ISAA) (1989) PROCAP: procedural guide for clients, architects and other professionals (C3).In Bactice Manual, The Natal Wimess
Printing and Publishing Company (Pty.) Ltd.
Johnson, W. (1951) The spoken word and the geat unsaid, Quarterly 30umal of Speech, 32, 421.
Lasswell, H.D. (1948) The structure and function of communication in society. In Bryson, L. (ed.) The Communication of Ideas , Institute of ReliØous and Social Studies, New York, pp. 37—51.
O'Reilly, J.J.N. (1987) A case study of a desi3) commission: problems highlighted; initiatives proposed. Current Paper, CP 27/73, Building Research Station, Watford.
O'Reilly, J.J.N. (1987) Better Briefing Means Better Buildings. Building Research Establishment, Watford.
Schua, A. (1970) Reflections on the h•obZem of Relevance. Yale University Press, New Haven.
Seeley, I.H. (1983) Building Economics. Macmillan, Landon. Shannon, C. and Weaver, W. (1949) The Mathematical Theory of Communication. University of Ninois Press, Urbana.
Skitmore, R.M. and Patchell, B. (1990) Developments in contract price forecasting and bidding techniques. In Brandon, P.S. (ed.) Quantity Surveying Techniques: New Directions, Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford, pp. 75-120.
South A-frican Institute of Chartered Accountants (SAICA) (1983) Statement AU21 IA. SAICA, Johannesburg.
Tubbs, S.L. and Moss, S. (1981) Interpersonal CommunicaZion. Random House, New York.
Young, R.D. (1986) An evaluation of written communication in auditing. Unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Stellenbosch, Stellenbosch.
396	Bowen and Edwards
　
Interpersonal communication in cost planning	397
　

　
