  
Project Management in Construction
About the AuthorSidney M. Levy is an independent construction industry consultant with more than 40 years of experience. He has taught and lectured at the University of Hartford, the Pratt Institute, the New York Institute of Technology, and the Korea Institute of Construction Technology. He is the author of numerous books, including Construction Databook, Design-Build Project Delivery, and Construction Superintendent's Operations Manual.
Project Management in ConstructionSidney M. LevySeventh editionNew York  Chicago  San Francisco  Athens London  Madrid  Mexico City  Milan New Delhi  Singapore  Sydney  torontoCopyright © 2018 by McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.ISBN: 978-1-25-985971-7 MHID:      1-25-985971-1.The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-1-25-985970-0, MHID: 1-25-985970-3.eBook conversion by codeMantra Version 1.0All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps.McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions or for use in corporate training programs. To contact a representative, please visit the Contact Us page at www.mhprofessional.com.Information contained in this work has been obtained by McGraw-Hill Education from sources believed to be reliable. However, neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its authors guarantee the accuracy or completeness of any information published herein, and neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its authors shall be responsible for any errors, omissions, or damages arising out of use of this information. This work is published with the understanding that McGraw-Hill Education and its authors are supplying information but are not attempting to render engineering or other professional services. If such services are required, the assistance of an appropriate professional should be sought.TERMS OF USEThis is a copyrighted work and McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill Education’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL EDUCATION AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND  EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill Education and its licen-sors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall McGrawHill Education and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.ContentsPreface   xvChapter 1. the Construction Industry 1 this Information technology thing 	1	Cloud Computing: Impacting the Way We Communicate and transmit Data 	2	What Do the experts See for Construction Down the road? 	2	National Institute of Standards and technology 	3	National Institute of building Sciences 	4	Gensler, an international design, planning, and consulting group 	5  Associated General Contractors of America 5 the off-Site Movement: Modular and Prefab 7  Let’s look at one of these off-site-oriented projects 7 3D Printing and the Construction Industry 8 the Green building Movement 	9 Sustainable Structures 	9What Is New in Contract Format? 	10 building Information Modeling 	10	Life Cycle Analysis 	11	What Do owners think? 	11	Chapter 2. the Start of the Construction Process 	13Let’s talk About the bidding Process 	14 the Letter of Intent 	15	Defining costs in the letter of intent 	17Subcontractor commitments via the letter of intent 	17 the letter of intent termination clause 	18	Prevalent types of Construction Contracts 	18Cost of the work plus a fee 	19 the stipulated- or lump-sum contract 	25 the cost-plus-a-fee with a GMP contract 	27	Construction management 	34Program manager 	37 the joint venture agreement 	38v  
    Contentsturnkey contracts 40Public-private partnership (P3) 40Contracts with government agencies 41Chapter 3. the General Conditions of the Construction Contract 47AIA A201—General Conditions of the Contract for Construction 47Article 1: General provisions 48Article 2: owner 48Article 3: Contractor 49Article 4: the architect 51Article 5: Subcontractors 52Article 6: Construction by owner or by separate contractors 54Article 7: Changes in the work 54Article 8: time 56Article 9: Payments and completion 56Article 10: Protection of persons and property 58Article 11: Insurance and bonds 58Article 12: uncovering and correction of work 59Article 13: Miscellaneous provisions 60Article 14: termination or suspension of the contract 60Article 15: Claims and disputes AIA A232—General Conditions of the Construction  60Manager Contract 61A Word to the Wise Chapter 4. ConsensusDoCS Integrated Project Delivery  62Contracts and the Lean Construction Concept the American Institute of Architects Integrated  63Project Delivery AIA Document A195™-2008—Standard Form of Agreement Between  64Owner and Contractor for Integrated Project Delivery® AIA Document A295™-2008—General Conditions of the Contract  66for Integrated Project Delivery® AIA Document C191™-2009—Standard Form Multi-Party Agreement for  67Integrated Project Delivery® AIA Document C195™-2008—Standard Form Single Purpose Entity  69Agreement for Integrated Project Delivery® 71exploring the Limited Liability Company Concept 72AIA e Series Contracts relating to Digital Data Protocols 73AIA Document e201™-2007—Digital Data Protocol exhibit® 73	AIA Document e202™-2008—building Information Modeling Protocol exhibit® 	74AIA Document e203™-2013—building Information Modeling  and Digital Data exhibit® 74ConsensusDoCS® 74the 2016 ConsensusDoCS revisions ConsensusDoCS® 200, Standard Agreement and General  Conditions Between Owner and Contractor  75(Where the Contract Price Is a Lump Sum) ConsensusDoCS® 200.1, Potentially Time and Price  75Impacted Materials 77ConsensusDoCS® 200.2, Electronic Protocol Addendum 77ConsensusDoCS® 300, Standard Form of Tri-Party  Agreement for Collaborative Delivery 77ConsensusDoCS® 310, Green Building Addendum (GBA) ConsensusDoCS® 410, Standard Design-Build Agreement and  General Conditions Between Owner and Design-Builder  78(Where the Basis of Payment Is the Cost of the Work with a GMP) ConsensusDoCS® 500, Standard Agreement and General  Conditions Between Owner and Construction Manager  (Where the Basis of Payment Is a Guaranteed Maximum  78 Price with an Option for Pre-Construction Services) ConsensusDoCS® 750, Standard Form of Agreement  79Between Contractor and Subcontractor 79Lean Construction 80these New Documents raise Insurance, Legal, and Claims Concerns 87the Legal Concerns of Integrated Project Delivery Projects 88Chapter 5. bonds and Insurance 89this risky business 89Why Contractors Fail 90bonds and the bonding Process 93the terminology of bonds 94ten things you should know about surety bonding 95bonds for Projects in Government 96the Miller Act 96the letter of credit 97the bonding process 97Prequalifying for a bond  98Insurance 99builder’s risk 99Workers’ compensation insurance 99Subcontractor default insurance 100Subguard®—default insurance for subcontractors 100Controlled insurance programs 101Integrated Project Delivery and Its effect on Surety bonds and Insurance 105IPD team Insurance 105Insurance terms 106Are New Insurance requirements on the horizon? 109Chapter 6. organizing the Project team 111organizing the Job in the office 112Addenda and bulletins 112Project files 114organizing the estimate 115Investigating allowance and bid alternates 117Alternates 119Shop drawings and the shop drawing log 119Informational copies 123the rFI log 124Job scheduling 127the Gantt or bar chart 130the critical path method 130    ContentsActivity duration times 	131 the importance of float and who owns it 	132 the project meeting minutes 	132 other forms to consider when getting organized 	135  Lien waivers—for progress and final payment 	135 organizing in the Field 	135 Shop Drawing organization 	139 the Future of Project organization 	142Chapter 7. Successful Project Completion Demands  a Successful Start 	143Starting off on the right Foot 	144 Controlling the Project Start 	144 review of the Contract with the owner 	145 review of the Project Specifications 	146  Specific items to look for when reviewing the specifications 146 record Drawings 	147Inspections and test reports (other than those required by Local officials) 	148 operations and Maintenance Manuals 	148Commissioning and tAb 	149 tAb—A Procedure that requires Special Attention 	149Commissioning 	150 the Punch List 	152 Is it a punch-list or warranty item? 	153	Attic stock, special tools, and spare parts 	153	Material safety data sheets 	153	Preparing for that First Project Meeting with the Subcontractors 	154Special requirements for a guaranteed maximum price     (GMP) contract 	160 that Dangerous end-of-Project Syndrome 160 A building Systems Commissioning Checklist 161	Looking Ahead to Final Acceptance 	161Chapter 8. estimating 	167 the basics 	167 the Construction Specification Institute (CSI) MasterFormat 169Acquiring a Database 	169 the purchased database 	171Acquiring the in-house database 	172 the weekly field labor report 	172 Combining cost codes and daily reports to produce the database 	173	Some other things to consider 	173Analyzing unit Costs 	174 Displaying unit costs 	174 bundling to create a unit cost 	175 order-of-Magnitude estimating 	176 order-of-magnitude issues to consider 177	Conceptual estimating 	177Sources of Conceptual estimating Data 178 the various stages of the process 	179the Post-Construction Project review 180Mining Completed Projects to enhance the Database 180the Project Parameter Cost Model Form 182the preparation of a project cost model data sheet 182Cost index data New Demands bring New building Classifications—uNIForMAt™ 184and omniClass™ 185omniClass™ 188Special requirements Associated with office building estimating 189Core and shell 189the tenant Work Letter 190the Developer’s responsibility 190Subcontractor responsibilities as they relate to tenant Fit-ups 193Chapter 9. buying out the Job 195reread the Contract with the owner 195Awarding Subcontracts 196the subcontract interview form 197the bid Summary Sheet 204unit Prices 206other items to consider during the solicitation of prices 208Combining Work to best Advantage 208Subcontract or Do It ourselves? 211the “we can do it cheaper” syndrome 212Key Questions to Ask Subcontractors During Negotiations 212Pitfalls to Avoid in Mechanical and electrical Contract Negotiations 214Who Is the Contractor? 214Issues to be Addressed 215temporary light and temporary power 215Installation of underground utilities 215Designing to local utility standards 216Warranties and Guarantees 216Spare Parts, Special tools, and “Attic” Stock 217Job Cleaning and the Contract 217Communicating the terms and Conditions of the Subcontract Agreement 219Importance of lien waiver requirements in the subcontract agreement 219Purchase orders 221ordering when exact quantities are not known 222Price protection and the purchase order 223Pitfalls to Avoid When Issuing Subcontracts and Purchase orders 225Do Your Subcontract Agreements Include these Key Provisions? 227Chapter 10. the Change order ConsensusDoCS and engineers Joint Contract  231Documents Committee (eJCDC) 232ConsensusDoCS: Section 8.1—Change order 232eJCDC: Article 10.01—Authorized changes in the work Change orders and integrated project delivery–type contracts,  233i.e., AIA A295 233    ContentsA Cardinal rule 233Starting off on the right foot other questions to consider as potential costs in addition  234to those above 234reviewing the Important Contents of a Change-order request two Important Change-order Provisions When Costs Are  235Difficult to Ascertain 236time and material work 237the verbal authorization to proceed 237What Constitutes “Cost” 238Watch those hourly Payroll Costs 239Completion time and the Change order 240Consequential damages 240Will contract time remain the same, be reduced, or be extended? 241Small-tool costs 242What costs other than bricks and mortar should be considered? 243What overhead and profit fees can be included in change-order work? 244When credits and charges both apply 245When change-order costs cannot be reasonably determined 245the construction change directive—the CCD 246be alert to other contract provisions relating to change-order work 247Public Works and the Change-order Process 247 What about disruptions to the workflow? 248roadblocks to Acceptance of Change orders 250the owner’s perspective 250the contractor’s perspective 251the architect and engineer’s perspective 251Liquidated Damages and the Change-order Process 255A typical LD clause 256Delays Affect More than Just Field Costs 258excusable delays 258Concurrent delays 259Compensable delays 259Documenting compensable delays the cost impact associated with delays, interruptions,  260and suspension of work 260the eichleay formula and contractor overhead costs 261When submitting the change order for delays 263 the basic elements required to establish a delay claim 264Pitfalls to Avoid When Preparing Change orders 265Change-order Cost Checklist 265effective Change-order Control 267Chapter 11. Quality Control and Quality Assurance 269the Father of Modern-Day Quality Control 270Deming’s 14 points 270Quality begins with Quality Design 271Strategies for Change 272total Quality Management 273benchmarking 274the International Standards organization 274Six Sigma Approach to Quality 275Six Sigma Approach in the Construction Industry 276From theory to Practice 277Quality control by observation 277Quality starts with a thorough review of the contract documents 278Quality control and the specifications 278using trade organizations to learn about quality standards 279Quality Control by Laser Scanning 279Quality control and quality assurance of bridge deck construction 2793D laser scanning at work at the right time 281the Preconstruction Conference—QC and QA 282Sample panels and mock-ups 284the punch list and QC/QA 285Developing a Company QC/QA Program 286the inspection checklist method 286Chapter 12. Project Documentation 295the Documentation Process 296Documentation to the owner 297the unique provisions of a GMP contract with respect to documentation 298Documentation to an owner from the construction manager 298Documentation to the Architect and engineer 300Shop drawing submittals, review, returns, and logs 300requests for Clarification and requests for Information 302Field Conditions Documentation 304the effect on “as-builts” 304the Coordination Process 305other Important Documents 305Cost proposal or cost estimate requests 305Conditions that impact completion time 306Documentation of Close-out requirements 308Documentation to the Subcontractors 309Is the scope of the work fully understood by all? 310Avoiding problems related to subcontractor misunderstandings 311Linking the subcontract agreement with the owner’s contract 312Subcontractor performance—the major concern 312Danger signs and how to interpret them 313that low subcontract bid—are problems waiting to surface? 316Documentation When Major Drawing revisions Are Made 317What to do with all of those 8½ × 11s 318What Impact have these Major revisions had on Productivity? 319Documentation required When Contracting with Public Agencies 320the Davis-bacon Act 320Complying with other government requirements 321Project Documentation from the Field 323the superintendent’s record of daily activities 323Photographs: important documentary components 327Chapter 13. Claims, Disputes, Arbitration, and Mediation 329Global Perspective on Construction Disputes 329What triggers Claims and Disputes? 330Contentsthe bid Proposal Process and the Potential for Disputes 331Do late bids count? 331other Potentials for Disputes 336oral contracts 336Disputes regarding contract interpretation 336Subsurface, changed, and differing conditions 341What is different about “differing conditions”? 342Differing Site Conditions (DSC) 343the geotechnical report 344using geotechnical disclaimers to advantage how can the risks associated with differing site  344conditions be reduced? 345the court and differing site conditions 345Shift Work and Its Impact on Productivity 352Differing or changed conditions 353Changed Conditions 363be wary of subcontractor input 365A word about lost productivity 366the Courts, Lost Productivity,  and the Measured Mile 367the measured mile approach the Mechanical Contractors Association of America  367and productivity studies 367Claims against professionals 368Acceleration: what it is and how it is used 373Arbitration and Mediation 376Mediation 377the arbitration process 377In Summation 379Chapter 14. Safety in Construction 381the occupational Safety and health Act Working toward an Accident-Free Construction  383Workplace 388the Danger of Power-Actuated tools Abandoned underground Storage tanks Present  396Another Jobsite hazard 397Safety Pays—in More Ways than one 397the positive effects of a good safety record 398Workers’ compensation insurance 399owners get involved in contractor safety 399Developing the Company Safety Program 400the statement of company policy 401objective of the Accident Prevention Program 401the safety director/safety coordinator 402Working rules and regulations of the safety program 404A hazard communication program 404Dealing with safety rule violators—the need for a model policy Consistency and fairness are key factors in administering  405the safety program 407the carrot and stick approach to safety 407Chapter 15. Design-build 417What Is Design-build? 417Why has design-build garnered so much attention recently? 418Legal Liability Issues Await those Who Are New to Design-build 422Developing a Design-build Capability 423Creating in-house design capability 425the joint venture 425the limited liability corporation—the LLC 428An architect- or contractor-led design-build team? 428Developing a Design-build Program 430Developing design-build proposals 431the two-phase design-build proposal 431Another approach 432how owners Select Design-builders 432the selection process 433using Contract Incentives 433Several forms of design-build contracts 434the teaming agreement 435Contract Provisions unique to the Design-build Process 442Special provisions of design-build contracts 443Contract provisions relating to defining the owner’s program 444the role of the subcontractor in the design-build process 445Design-build in the Public Sector 447Federal Design-build Contracting u.S. Department of transportation (uSDot) Design-build  447effectiveness Study of January 2006 447Public agency contracting methods 448the two-part rFP 448evaluation of the Phase two proposers 449Where is design-build today in government contracting? 449Chapter 16. Sustainability and Green buildings 451the Green Movement 451two Approaches to Mitigating the Problem 452Sustainable technology 452Initial Cost versus Pay-back 453the Marketplace 453LeeD (Leadership in energy and environmental Design) 453LeeD v4 455u.S. Government takes the LeeD 455how Do the States Stand? 462the Architect’s role in Green building Design Architects Involved in Green building Design Must  462Consider the Legal risks 462Green Contract Concerns for the Contractor 463Shaw Development v. Southern Builders 464What Do We Mean by Sustainability? 465Contentsthe LaFargeholcin Foundation List of Sustainable  Construction 466What are some of these eco-friendly materials? 466Whole-building Design Marks the Green building Approach 468Some Design-build/Sustainable building Guidelines 469Why You and Your Company Should take a Look at Green building 469Pay-back Period for Green buildings: Another Study 471other revealing but not so apparent benefits of green buildings 473the Greening of existing buildings 478JohnsonDiversey Continues to Innovate Chapter 17. building Information Modeling and the  480Need for Interoperability 481the origins of bIM 482bIM—Its Promises and Problems 483the American Institute of Steel Construction and Its Foresight 4844D bIM and Scheduling 4845D and 6D bIM 486the role of 6D in the bIM Process 488Laser Scanning and bIM 489benefits of laser scanning 490the Legal Aspects of bIM other bIM contractual stipulations that a contractor  490should consider when joining the team 491the first bIM lawsuit 492best Practices Advice for bIM team Members 493Cloud-based bIM technology 493American Institute of Architects’ Digital Practice Documents 495Market research reveals how bIM Is received by Contractors 497Market research and how bIM Is received by owners 498A Case Study 498Adding 3D Printing to building Information Modeling 499Index   501  
PrefaceThe project manager on a construction site can be likened to the hub in a spoked wheel around which all the on-site managerial activities revolve. He or she is the focus for the project’s owner, its architect, its engineer, and the construction team of subcontractors and material and equipment vendors. Government agencies, whether the local building department, the OSHA inspector, or myriad officials when working on public works projects, must also be dealt with, and dealt with effectively, by the project manager.  The journey from Point A to Point B is rarely a smooth one, often with roadblocks, detours, and sometimes sinkholes and the need to change direction quickly; this task falls to the project manager.  Along with having technical knowledge, the project manager must be adept at getting people to work together harmoniously, have some knowledge of the legal world, and be an accountant at times and father confessor on other occasions. But all of these efforts and challenges seem to be worth it as we see the structure rising from the ground, advancing toward project completion, and finally turned over to an expectant owner. Then we move on to another project, but when passing that old job, we say to ourselves, “I built that.”  In the end, project management is an exercise in control—control over quality, schedule, costs. Each one, by itself, is a full-time job, yet all fall under the responsibility of the project manager.  Project Management in Construction, Seventh Edition, examines many of the basic tenets involved in managing a construction project, dealing with the forces that will most likely be met and suggesting ways to overcome these forces and move on.  I have been associated with the construction industry for more than 40 years and have seen the many facets of that business, from working summers in high school and college as a laborer and a time clerk to full-time employment starting as assistant superintendent and graduating to project manager, and finally to executive vice-president of a major New England general contractor. Upon retirement I became a construction consultant xvPrefaceengaged with many project owners as well as general contractors and subcontractors. Through this work, I gained the perspective of each one of the participants, which has helped me to help them resolve the concerns and disagreements that usually arise in the complex process of the design and construction of a building or structure.  I pass this knowledge on to you, the reader, and quote an anonymous old-timer’s sage advice: “Smart men learn from experience; wise men learn from the experience of others.” I hope Project Management in Construction, Seventh Edition, will provide you with some of those worthwhile experiences. Sidney M. Levy
Project Management in Construction  
This page intentionally left blank  	Chapter1The Construction IndustryThe construction industry, like so many basic American businesses, is being transformed to meet the demands of the twenty-first century; these demands affect and impact all of us in that industry.  Construction is a mighty economic engine; the 650,000 construction companies in the United States employ about 6 million people. In April 2016, the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis reported that it was projected that all construction activity in the United States would amount to approximately $1.15 trillion. Add to that the amount of money spent on furniture, fixtures, and equipment (FFE) by commercial construction, new hospitals and schools, public buildings, and residential construction and you can add another $1 trillion to that figure.  The construction industry is in the midst of the information technology (IT) era that shows no indication of slowing down.This Information Technology ThingAn easy definition of information technology (IT) is that it consists of a set of tools, methodologies, and procedures such as data conversion, storage, dissemination, and retrieval. It is a system for analysis and design; it is devices to collect, process, and present data via various types of algorithms; it is a process that allows a computer to perform calculations, data processing, and/or automated reasoning tasks.  We now have a basket full of mobile devices for communication, transmittal of photographs, collection and storage of data, and rapid distribution to concerned parties.1  With so many of us using smart phones and iPads to access the Internet, going “online” takes on a different meaning, allowing us to communicate, transfer data, and obtain data wirelessly and seamlessly.  But with advances in technology, another problem has been growing—an unsecure network requiring protection from hacking. Cybersecurity is of concern to all companies—imagine having a competitor “hack” into your bid proposal to a major client.  Use of software in the construction industry for invitations to bid, estimating, scheduling, budgeting, cost control, and building information modeling (BIM) is now an everyday affair. BIM is being widely used by the architectural and engineering design teams providing the transition from two-dimensional (2D) paper documents to 3D technology, allowing them to link up digitally. Cloud Computing: Impacting the Way We Communicate and Transmit DataThe National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) defines cloud computing as “a model for enabling convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction.”  For those of us who can’t understand government jargon, cloud computing is simply a storage and data transmission service that is available anywhere, anytime, on any type of device, and in any capacity or location desired. You don’t have to wait to go online with your service provider.   Taking the 3D concept further, we now have organizations such as the Bartlett School of Architecture in London developing a method of using 3D printing to create concrete structural elements. We have a prominent U.S. general contracting firm using lasers to accurately provide dimensions in buildings being renovated, rather than having to physically measure areas after their existing surfaces had been removed by demolition, thereby developing very accurate “as builts.”  The “scan” created by the laser can capture the shape and appearance of the selected structure or its components and direct these dimensions through the Cloud to the BIM model.What Do the Experts See for Construction Down the Road?According to the World Economic Forum (WEF) at its 2016 meeting, productivity, in general, has stagnated over the past 40 years. WEF claims that the future is here but it is not widely distributed—and it hasn’t trickled   
down to the small, local construction companies from the large international builders.  Digital technology ranging from BIM to estimating to smart equipment technology is here and has become more mainstream in the past five years. The goal for design and construction in the coming decades, according to WEF, can be stated very simply, taking shape in three areas:■■ Economics—increasing the speed and lowering the costs of the construction project■■ Social Impact—how new construction impacts the local community including the new roads and expanded utilities required to service these buildings■■ Environment—creating structures that are energy efficient, environmentally friendly, and utilizing sustainable materials wherever possible  The increasing use of BIM has resulted in a more rapid design-construct cycle along with a reduction in errors and omissions and conflicts created by closer coordination among the various design disciplines. All of the benefits created by BIM result in savings to the owner, architect, and contractor.  The communities where new construction is being planned are being scrutinized by local activist groups who feel they should to have some say in the process that will take place when new construction is planned for their neighborhoods. We will all see these concerns being given more attention by developers and building owners. WEF, in its paper “What’s the Future of the Construction Industry?”, predicted that full-scale digitization in the design-construct industry would lead to savings of 13% to 21% in the design and engineering professions and 10% to 17% in construction. Based on results experienced by owners, architects, engineers, and contractors in the past couple of years these savings appear to be real.National Institute of Standards and TechnologyNIST, along with other governmental, professional, and trade organizations, points to key challenges facing the design-construct industries and like most, sees the need to increase productivity. How to get there is another matter, but most solutions seem to involve more IT.  NIST lists the following activities with the potential for breakthrough improvements:■■ Widespread use of interoperable technology applications and BIM. Interoperability of software systems, so everyone is “speaking” the same software “language.” This will allow all parties to communicate more  rapidly through the Cloud with unlimited memory capacity.■■ Improved job-site efficiency through more effective interfacing and  collaboration of people, processes, materials, equipment, and IT.■■ Greater use of prefabrication, pre-assembly, modularization, and off-site fabrication and processes.■■ Innovative demonstration installations to show that the schemes on paper can actually be transformed into workable, efficient products or assemblies.■■ Effective performance measures to drive efficiency and support innovation.  All of these NIST observations along with others that follow seem to change that “one brick at a time” thinking to an industrial/manufacturing frame of mind.National Institute of Building SciencesThe National Institute of Building Sciences (NIBS) foresees a steady growth in modular and off-site construction, which it categorizes into four directions:1. Prefabricated construction (prefab) that can encompass the off-site prefabrication of building components, sub-assemblies, or volumetric units that fit perfectly into the building’s on-site structural framework.2. Modular construction: This is viewed as a method to reduce complexity while offering customized products or units. The Modular Building Institute (MBI) defines modular construction as that being performed in a factory setting producing 3D modules that will be transported to the site and assembled at the building’s location.3. Industrial building systems (IBS) is actually the term that encompasses the use of prefabrication, off-site manufacturing of components, and the “industrialization” of the construction industry, that is, applying manufacturing techniques to what was once a stick-by-stick industry. Emphasis is being placed upon improved productivity, improved quality, and improved safety.4. Open building manufacturing (OBM) is a concept based on applying the productivity method to construction, utilizing standardized components that can be assembled to build the end product. This OBM approach to construction decouples building parts in order to determine which types are most likely to be designed and produced as a manufactured component.Gensler, an international design, planning, and consulting groupGensler, an international design, planning, and consulting group with offices in the United States, Latin America, the Middle East, and the Asia Pacific region, published its list of the “six mega trends” that it sees as impacting the world economy by the year 2025. These trends, if they do develop, will have a significant effect on the way we design and build.Trend #1: The digital world we experience today will become more of an integral part of our working and leisure lives. We will interact with this stream of digital data to improve our work life and home life.Trend #2: The world around us will become smarter. Buildings, products, and services will be more integrated, offering us more connectivity to people and places, and access to goods at an astoundingly faster pace.Trend #3: Time is money. Business and personal purchases will expect no “dead time.” Construction projects, both design and build, will undoubtedly fit into this category, more so than today. Schedule commitment will become sacrosanct.Trend #4: Urban centers will be connected by human networks. Real estate in urban areas will innovate in both form and means to meet new lifestyles. Transit-served hubs will allow for new growth and incorporate what are now suburban areas.Trend #5: Neo-industrial cities will transition to centers where innovation is the key to growth. These cities will support digital and artisanal cultures, freelance innovators, and the tools and the environment to speed new products and ideas to market.Trend#6: Health and safety will take a leading role in protecting individuals or an entire city. Disasters created by nature or those man-made that urban areas often face, along with security threats, epidemics, and pandemics, will be managed by a government mind-set armed with data and the tools necessary to deal with these issues. Smart cities will be prepared to engage and deal with matters related to wellness.Associated General Contractors of AmericaIn its study “The Challenges Facing a Growing Industry: The 2016 Construction Hiring and Business Outlook,” the Associated General Contractors of America (AGC) sees workforce shortages as one of the major concerns in the near future.  The AGC is heartened by what it sees as contractors’ investments in IT as a way to increase the efficiency of their overall operations. It also sees in the years ahead a continued growth that will come with challenges such as recruitment of qualified workers and experienced superintendents. Sixtyfive percent of general contractors in the study were worried about the performance of their subcontractors and particularly the poor safety and health performance of their employees which impact the overall project. The AGC lists the following reasons for their concerns that enough qualified construction workers will join the industry’s labor pool:1. The dismantling of public vocational schools and technical education programs, and more emphasis at the high school level urging graduates to continue on to college. Community colleges continue to offer some types of “trade school” programs to augment the loss of vocational schools.  Not mentioned in the AGC report but a hot topic in most local newspapers are the scams in these so-called for-profit technology schools offering courses in welding, auto mechanics, plumbing, and the like. And after charging excessive fees, they often fail to place graduates in a job, and these new “graduates” leave the program with no employment prospects in sight, but owing the “school” thousands of dollars. The government has recently seen the need to look into these problems and besides cutting off government monetary support, has taken to warning prospective students to be very careful before deciding to enroll in some “for-profit” universities and assume the burden of paying off their student loans.2. The decline in union membership has resulted in the decline of new members being enrolled in their apprenticeship programs, further contributing to the shortage of skilled workers. Besides providing the book learning with on-the-job training with experienced tradesman, some unions have gone further. The International Union of Bricklayers & Allied Craftworkers and its component the International Masonry Institute (IMI) have teamed up with 50 architecture and engineering colleges and universities to include the basics of masonry and concrete design and construction in their curriculum.3. Immigration has become a political football, and restrictions on the numbers and types of persons allowed permission to enter the United States has been limited, even though there are shortages of highly skilled and educated people in many fields.  One of the ways in which builders were looking to compensate for these shortages of skilled and unskilled labor is to find a way to reduce the amount of on-site labor needed, and that leads to increased interest in constructing modular components off-site that could just be set in place when arriving at the project by trailer. Another similar approach is to look for ways to prefabricate portions of the structure instead of assembling them  piece-by-piece on-site.The Off-Site Movement: Modular and PrefabThe Off-Site Construction Council (OSCC) in 2015 conducted a survey to find out what type of off-site prefabrication was most utilized by the 22 participants in that survey. The survey not only identified the components but also the effectiveness of the software that permitted this off-site work to be fitted into the on-site structure. Prefabbed HVAC, plumbing, and electrical risers and assemblies were employed by 66.67% of the respondents, not too surprising because these components lend themselves to being fabricated either on-site or off-site and installed as a pre-assembled module. Structural steel assemblies were installed 61.9% of the time, also not too surprisingly because the American Institute of Steel Construction (AISC) back in 2004 initiated its CIM Steel Integration Standards Version 2 (CIS/2), a design software system that was compatible with several BIM software developers.  Precast concrete structures were purchased by 61.9% of those surveyed, curtain wall assemblies by 47.6%, prefabricated exterior wall assemblies by 38.1%, and service pods (bathrooms, utility rooms, etc.) by 33.3%.  NIBS and the OSCC found that 93 percent of the architects, engineers, contractors, and owners they contacted had implemented some form of off-site construction process in the years leading up to 2015. Not much attention had been focused on these practices in the past, but the necessity to increase overall productivity, the need to speed up the completion schedule and increase in profits using some form of product made off-site, and that nagging concern about labor shortages made contractors start to check things out.Let’s look at one of these off-site-oriented projectsThe new Exempla Saint Joseph Hospital in Denver, Colorado, completed in 2014, utilizing prefabricated components, gives us a look into the future. This 840,000-square-foot hospital, eight stories high with 350 patient rooms, 24 operating rooms, laboratories, and office space, showed significant  savings in costs and scheduling, along with increased productivity and safety, by applying many of the off-site practices.  The total construction budget for the project was $360 million. All  bathrooms, some 440, were prefabricated off-site and included the installation of all finishes, towel bars, mirrors, toilet-paper holders, and fixtures. Shipped to the site, these modules were set in place in depressed floor slabs where all utility rough-in connections had been installed, making final connection rather simple.  According to the general contractor, this procedure alone resulted in a schedule reduction of 52 work days, indirect cost savings of $3.1 million, and resulted in only four safety incidents. The upper four floors of the structure used prefabricated exterior wall panels that came complete with framing, brick ledge, sheathing, air barrier, brick ties, and spray-foam insulation. The general contractor reported a schedule reduction of 41 work days, indirect costs savings of $42.4 million, a reduction of 5,000 worker hours, and only two reported safety incidents occurred by the use of these prefabbed components.  The general contractor (GC), in collaboration with the design team, made extensive use of BIM to work through the prefabrication and modular unit process with site-interfacing and placement schedules. Although these  savings in costs, manpower, time, and profits on this project may be the exception rather than the rule, the application of off-site fabrication  certainly points to a movement that will continue to grow.  Another new technology that is just coming into its own and has unlimited potential is the use of 3D printing.3D Printing and the Construction IndustryAnother technology that promises to impact the way we do business is the 3D printer that can now “print out” concrete footings and walls leaving  cavities for plumbing and electrical risers. The earliest 3D printers were built in the late 1980s, first patented by Dr. Kodama from the Nagoya Municipal Research Institute in Japan. He built a solid, printed object using photopolymers that built up this 3D product in layers. Charles Hull invented the first stereolithography apparatus (SLA)—a 3D printer. They key to stereolithography is the material, which is an acrylic-based polymer.  When hit with a UV laser beam this polymer will “grow” into a solid piece of hard plastic molded into the shape of the desired 3D object.  Other printer improvements have since been made, and other patents issued. Today we have one printer capable of using a special concrete  mixture, thicker than conventional ready mix, that allows it to build a self-supporting foundation wall as additional layers are added. A Chinese company, Winsun, is using this technology to build single-family houses. Working with 3D BIM, and as the technology and operational skills improve, the limits of 3D printing have not been established.The Green Building MovementThe U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC) reported, as of January 2016, more than 74,500 commercial projects in the United States constructed using the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification. The LEED rating system evaluates the environmental performance of a building and assigns points for achieving various levels of that performance, ranging from Certified (40–49 points) to Silver (50–59 points) to Gold (60– 79 points), to the highest level, Platinum (80–110 points). Different LEED ratings have been assigned by USGBC to new construction and major renovations, to commercial interiors, to schools, retail space, health care, and neighborhood development, the latter a program now in its pilot stage.  The federal government has wholeheartedly embraced the green building movement. In 2010, the General Services Administration (GSA) moved to require all new federal buildings and major renovations to meet USGBC Gold standards. Starting in 2011, the U.S. Treasury Building in Washington, D.C., believed to be the oldest building in the world to receive LEED Gold Certification, has been estimated to have saved the government about $3.5 million per year in energy and lease cost savings.Sustainable StructuresThe need to conserve materials in a world where urban areas will continue to expand and areas devoted to the production of food and raw materials may be limited places more emphasis on reduction of waste and increased use of materials that can be replenished without endangering the environment.  Sustainable design and construction rely on the ability to design and build a structure that is not only environmentally responsible but also resource efficient throughout the life cycle of the building. Sustainable building incorporates not only concern about return-on-investment but also the costs over the entire life cycle of the building, from selection of materials to cost to dispose of materials once the structure exceeds its life cycle.  Construction in the United States contributes significantly to the disposal of waste it creates as well as generating pollution and wastewater discharge. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) estimates that construction and building operations in this country result in:■■ The addition of 25–40 percent to municipal waste disposal■■ The generation of 50 percent of emissions of CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons), a derivative of methane, ethane, and propane■■ The generation of 30 percent of CO2 production  
    Chapter One  A sustainable building is one that takes into account not only the materials that go into a building but also the public health, not only of the occupants of the building but also the surrounding community.What Is New in Contract Format?A few new contract formats were issued in the period 2010 to 2016 and reflect the trend toward avoidance of adversarial relations among all parties to the construction process. These new contracts represent a new approach to the relationship between owner, architect, construction manager, general contractor, and subcontractor. The key words are “integration” and “collaboration” as well as “risk sharing” and “reward sharing.”  ConsensusDOCS® is a contract format developed by a diverse group of members from the design and construct community. Their purpose was to incorporate “best practices” and yield better results with less disagreements and disputes, hence the name ConsensusDOCS.  The American Institute of Architects (AIA) Integrated Project Delivery (IPD) agreement is another document that encouraged this collaborative movement. The trend toward involving all parties, design consultants,  general contractors, subcontractors, and vendors in the formation of a “team” early in the project’s inception appears to be growing, and such a relationship proving valuable. Lean construction contracts, based on the production line practices developed by Toyota, invite comments and suggestions from all levels of the manufacturing process—from supervisors to line workers. This same procedure applied to the design and build  community has shown positive results.Building Information ModelingBIM is revolutionizing the construction industry by working in 3D (design), 4D (as in virtual schedules), and 5D (quantity take-offs and estimating). This process has substantially decreased errors and omissions, shortened the time from design to construction to occupancy, and saved both time and money for all parties. Some federal government agencies have adopted BIM as their prime project delivery choice and other sectors of our economy will follow. For the project manager encountering BIM for the first time, the challenges may be formidable, but will need to be conquered since it looks like this 3D world is here to stay.  Laser scanning has also entered mainstream construction as scanning equipment has become less cost prohibitive. Being able to convert field measurements into digital form precisely creates “as built” conditions and is a proven tool accurately measuring areas to be renovated; laser scanning joins the other new technologies vastly improving the quality of construction projects.Life Cycle AnalysisThis is another term that project managers will be hearing more frequently. Life cycle analysis (LCA) is a method used to evaluate the environmental impact of processes and products that begins during the design stage and continues through the construction cycle and onto the building’s operation. LCA looks at energy usage, materials used in construction, along with the waste and pollutants generated during the life of the building. This process can stop at the analysis of the construction and building operations once the building has been completed or can be expanded to include the project’s entire life cycle, generally considered to be 60 years of operation. The latter will continue to assess maintenance and replacement of key equipment.  Although LCA is a function of creating value for future design and construction, the project manager should be acquainted with the term, especially if he is involved in green building construction where owner– architect discussions may include collection of data relating to environmental efficiencies.What Do Owners Think?The Construction Management Association of America (CMAA) conducted an owner’s survey in 2010 and updated it in 2015. It asked owners what were their major challenges and what were their “important but secondary” challenges, and lastly, what issues were not a problem. Since these are the people we deal with on an everyday basis, the results of these surveys are worthy of our consideration.The most urgent challenges were as follows:■■ The high cost of change orders, indicating that contractors need to scrutinize these costs more closely before submitting them to the owner.■■ Too many change orders (which might be a reflection of the next item below).■■ Poor quality of the design documents—plans and specifications.■■ Inadequate budgets (not really a contractor concern unless requests for payments are slow in coming).■■ Lack of innovation in the industry and new ideas. [This seems to be being addressed by new contract formats (i.e., IPD), BIM, more prefabrication and off-site assembly, etc.]    Chapter OneThe least urgent challenges were as follows:■■ Adopting lean technologies.■■ Safety programs, and attention to safety in general.■■ Fluctuation in prices of materials and equipment.■■ Cybercrime and security of stored data.■■ Meeting sustainable goals in design and construction.  The CMAA also asked its respondents what they foresee as changing the most in the construction industry over the period 2013 to 2018. Some of their answers were noteworthy.■■ Increase in more preconstruction services, at added costs, involving owner, designers, and contractors to work more closely to eliminate errors, omissions, conflicts, and duplication in documents so that the potential for a “no change order” construction cycle can be accomplished■■ Better control over budgets, schedules, and having contractors assume more risk in getting work done with minimal change orders■■ Searching for contractors that will be more creative in design-build  projects at more competitive pricing■■ Using BIM on all projects regardless of the size to determine the best constructability for the project and also using BIM for life-cycle and building management purposes■■ Although a majority of the owner respondents indicated they have had experience with BIM modeling, they have had much less experience with 4D (scheduling) and 5D (cost data modeling). Only 63% said they had no 4D experience and 74% indicated no 5D experience  We will experience sea changes in the way we do business in the coming years because of the impact of existing and new technologies. Relationships between owner, architects, engineers, builders, and their subcontractors will change with the recognition that working together to solve problems is certainly less stressful and more cost effective than the old adversarial relationships.  But many things will not change: the need for professionalism in our work, the ability to form a team that works together, and relationships that recognize that we can learn from each other if we listen and really try.  This is an exciting time to be in the construction business and take on the responsibilities of a project manager—I sure wish I was there with you.            vi  Contents    vii  vi  xvi          2    Chapter One      2    Chapter One  The Construction Industry    3  The Construction Industry    3  10  The Construction Industry    3  10  