‘CHASTE’: construction hazard assessment with spatial and temporal exposureOphir Rozenfeld , Rafael Sacks & Yehiel RosenfeldTo cite this article: Ophir Rozenfeld , Rafael Sacks & Yehiel Rosenfeld (2009) ‘CHASTE’: construction hazard assessment with spatial and temporal exposure, Construction Management and Economics, 27:7, 625-638, DOI: 10.1080/01446190903002771To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/01446190903002771Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rcme20
Construction Management and Economics (July 2009) 27, 625–638	‘CHASTE’: construction hazard assessment with spatial and temporal exposureOPHIR ROZENFELD1*, RAFAEL SACKS2 and YEHIEL ROSENFELD3 1 Plaza Centers N.V., Bucharest, Romania 2 Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Technion, Haifa, Israel 3 National Building Research Institute, IsraelTaylor and FrancisReceived 16 January 2008; accepted 28 April 200910.1080/01446190903002771CHASTE—‘Construction Hazard Assessment with Spatial and Temporal Exposure’—is a conceptual model that enables forecasting of safety risks in construction projects for different trades, at appropriate levels of detail and reliability for different planning windows and managerial purposes, in a highly automated fashion. Unlike earlier models, CHASTE explicitly accounts for the fact that construction workers are frequently endangered by activities performed by teams other than their own. The risks to which workers are exposed change through time, as the activities performed and the physical environment of construction sites change. CHASTE uses a knowledge base of construction activities and probabilities of loss-of-control events, coupled with a project’s construction plan and a digital building model, to forecast risk levels for work teams. It has been implemented in prototype software and tested on two projects.Keywords: Construction safety, safety management, lean construction, risk analysis.
IntroductionWorldwide, the construction industry stands out conspicuously among all other industries as a primary ‘contributor’ to severe and fatal work-related accident statistics. The average fatality rate in construction, in terms of the number of fatalities per 100 000 workers per annum, is 14 to 15 in Europe (EASHW, 2001); 18 to 19 in the USA (Kartam and Bouz, 1998), and 20 to 22 in Israel (CBS, 2005). The average fatality rate for all other industries in western countries is just 3 to 4 (ILO, 2003).  Owing to their very nature, safety management is more difficult in construction projects than in stable work settings. Construction projects are dynamic, have frequent work team rotations, are exposed to changing weather conditions, and have high rates of unskilled workers. Unlike most industrial work environments in stable facilities, where production plans are closely controlled and individual tasks are well practised even when product mixes change, construction sites undergo continuous changes in site layout, in the topology and geometry of the facilities under construction, in the work conditions, and even in the design of work to be done. As a result, the levels of risk to which construction personnel are exposed vary greatly, as both the hazards and the degree of exposure change with time.*Author for correspondence. E-mail: ophir@plazacenters.comConstruction Management and EconomicsISSN 0144-6193 print/ISSN 1466-433X online © 2009 Taylor & Francis http://www.informaworld.comDOI: 10.1080/01446190903002771  Griffel et al. (2007) found that, despite the recommendations in safety literature to perform frequent preliminary hazard analyses (PHAs) (Brown, 1976; Goetsch, 1996; Holt, 2001), the prevailing common practice in construction safety management is to invest resources (money, time, effort, etc.) in safety-related activities at a steady and uniform rate through each significant phase of a project, according to a generic long-range forecast of the risks at each phase. Similarly, Tang et al. (1997) found that intensive hazard analyses at construction sites are hardly ever performed. Where they are performed, hazard identification levels are often far from ideal (Carter and Smith, 2006), possibly owing to the lack of suitable tools. In general, the investment in safety includes acquisition of personal safety gear and collective safety equipment, employing safety administration personnel, and providing safety training and promotion materials. Actions taken to reduce risk levels are primarily motivated by the need to fulfil prescriptive legal requirements.  In construction settings risk levels fluctuate with changes in the physical environment, with the changing nature of the works performed as projects progress, and with the turnover of crews and equipment. Thus uniform levels of investment in proactive safety measures can be illusive and inefficient. Instead, safety management resources (personnel and equipment) should be applied to enhance safety in accordance with the level of risk at any given time and place. Since construction project conditions and plans are also unpredictable in the short term (Radosavljevic et al., 2002), this can only be achieved if risks are not only analysed in advance at a macro-scale, but also continuously monitored at a micro-scale as the work proceeds, for each time-phase and at each location.  If risk levels could be forecast reliably and easily, construction workers and managers (company safety manager, site engineer, project manager, superintendents, etc.) could better mitigate the risks in numerous ways: ● Adjusting master plans or weekly work plans, rescheduling or relocating activities in order to avoid peak risk levels that can occur when and where crews are endangered by the simultaneous activities of other crews, as shown schematically in Figure 1(a). This can be termed ‘risk levelling’ as it is conceptually similar to levelling resources in order to avoid over-allocation; it reschedules activities to avoid peak risk levels, as shown in Figure 1(b).● Providing appropriate training and safety briefings close to the time of specific expected risks, and ensuring the use of safety equipment when needed (Rosenfeld et al., 2006). Application of safety measures in direct response to risk levels (Sacks et al., 2005) embodies the lean concept of pull flow control (Womack and Jones, 2003), in which products or services (in this case safety management) are pulled by actual demand (risk levels that represent workers’ needs for safe work environments). Pull flow is in direct contrast to push flow, in which resources are applied according to long-range forecasts of demand.● Changing construction methods or workers’ positions where peak risk levels are identified.(Figure 1ab) Overlap between acRescheduling activity 2 removes the overlap, thus eliminating the peak safety risk level‘Risk levelling’—However, risk levelling, pull flow control and otherivities 2 andscheduling fo4 generates a peak risk level because workers of activity 4 are exposed to a hazard inherent in activity  s fety 2 safety-enhancing interventions require the ability to predict long- and short-term risk levels at appropriate degrees of detail. Thus the primary goal of this research was to propose, implement a prototype of, and test a sophisticated yet user-friendly tool that enables both long- and short-term forecasting of safety risk levels, with less effort and with greater accuracy compared to the current methods. This required development of a new approach, which we have called the ‘CHASTE’ model (CHASTE is an acronym for ‘Construction Hazard Assessment with Spatial and Temporal Exposure’).Safety risk assessment in constructionFigure 1	‘Risk levelling’—rescheduling for safety(a) Overlap between activities 2 and 4 generates a peak risk level because workers of activity 4 are exposed to a hazard inherent in activity 2(b) Rescheduling activity 2 removes the overlap, thus eliminating the peak safety risk levelThe general approach to risk assessment in construction as in other industries, as presented in theprofessional literature and standards (Hinze, 1997; ISI, 2000; PN-N, 2000; Holt, 2001; Manuele, 2005), is to identify the risks and then evaluate them by multiplying the likelihood of an accident by the potential severity of that accident. The difficult part of this approach is to evaluate the likelihood of any potential accident.  The first step is to identify and assess hazards for each specific kind of activity. Identifying hazards can be a complicated chore, because there are many different kinds of factors, and determining the relevance of each one is almost an impossible mission. In principle, statistical analysis of historical construction workrelated accident data, seeking the numerical probabilities and severity levels for each type of accident, would be a straightforward way to evaluate the risks. However, this approach is problematic for two reasons: the likelihood of occurrence for most potential accidents is extremely small, and, as Gyi et al. (1999) pointed out, there is a high rate of under-reporting of accidents and near-misses. Thus very large sample sizes would be required to achieve statistical significance of the distributions obtained. Yet detailed information for assessing any kind of risk is rarely available (Warszawski and Sacks, 2004). Indeed, accident reports are becoming increasingly unavailable to researchers as a result of privacy protection laws. Fortunately, although assessment of risks is crucial for improving safety management, precise evaluation is not really necessary (Jannadi and Almishari, 2003); an estimated predicted level of the risks will suffice for the safety manager to take the correct actions.  A drawback of existing methods for risk assessment in construction (Jannadi and Almishari, 2003; Yi and Langford, 2006; Wang and Boukamp, 2007) is that they do not explicitly account for the fact that on construction sites, workers not only endanger themselves or others in their immediate vicinity; they also endanger other personnel who may be in the path of danger above, below or in the same general area. Falling objects, for example, are a particular hazard that is relatively unique to construction environments.Hypothesis and methodIn response to the need for safety risk forecasting in construction that is time and space dependent, we propose that: Hypothesis 1: Given existing information technologies, it is possible to forecast safety risks in construction projects for different trades, at appropriate levels of detail and reliability for different planning windows and managerial purposes, in a highly automated fashion.  To test this proposition, a prototypical system was designed, implemented and tested. This entailed taking the following steps: (1) Development of a conceptual approach that would enable the calculations, including identification of all required components. The approach is detailed in the following sections.(2) Research to establish the data required and to compile the knowledge base. This step employed the construction job safety analysis (CJSA) method (Rozenfeld et al., 2007). The procedure is outlined below and use of the resulting construction safety knowledge base is explained in the sections ‘Determining hazard levels’, ‘Calculating exposure’ and ‘Setting severity levels’ below.(3) Implementation of the software. The first prototype was implemented as a Visual Basic application that manipulates data from Microsoft Project, Microsoft Access and AutoCAD. The computing details are outside of the scope of this paper.(4) Verification by testing of the prototype, first using the archive data for a small building project and then a full-scale test on a large and complex industrial project. The tests are described in the ‘Application’ section below.Terms such as ‘hazard’, ‘accident’ and ‘exposure’ have been defined slightly differently by different authors writing on the subject of occupational safety in general and construction safety in particular (Covan, 1995; Hinze, 1997; Holt, 2001). For the sake of clarity, in Table 1 we define a set of terms as they are used in this paper. We also introduce a new term, ‘loss-ofcontrol event’. Every stage within each activity performed on a construction site has numerous typical ‘loss-of-control’ events associated with it, such as ‘dropping a tool’, ‘falling from a ladder’ or ‘formwork collapse’, and each such event has a distinct likelihood of occurrence dependent on team size, skill, space, climatic conditions and various other factors. The events are related to activities through the hierarchy as shown in Figure 2: each activity is divided into subactivities, which are further divided into work stages. Each work stage has a set of possible loss-of-control events.Figure 2 Primary object definitions in the CJSA knowledge baseThe CJSA method was developed specifically to meet the needs of the CHASTE model because the JSA (job safety analysis) or JHA (job hazard analysis) practice that is common in industrial settings (Chao and Henshaw, 2002), which focuses on selfendangerment, is not sufficient for construction. The CJSA method compiles a knowledge base that defines: Table 1	Glossary of termsTermDefinitionAccidentAn unintentional event that causes bodily or property damageAccident scenarioA hypothetical chain of events that may lead to an accidentHazardA work method, a piece of equipment, or a physical environment that bears the potential of triggering an accidentLoss-of-control eventAn unwanted, unintended event in which control over a hazard is lost. A loss-of-control event may or may not result in an accidentHazard levelThe likelihood of loss of control of a hazardExposureThe presence of a potential victim (or victims) in a zone that may be affected in an accident scenarioTemporal exposurePresence at a time during which a loss-of-control event may occurSpatial exposurePresence at a region at which a loss-of-control event may have impactRegional exposurePresence within a general region exposed to a loss-of-control eventDirect exposurePresence directly within the potential strike path of an accident scenarioSelf-exposureExposure to a risk that a worker creates by his/her own actionsPeer exposureExposure to a risk created by another activity performed at the same work area as the one in which he/she is presentExposure levelThe probability of being exposedFigure 2 Primary object definitions in the CJSA knowledge base● a work breakdown structure of typical activities, sub-activities, work stages and the possible lossof-control events associated with them in the hierarchy shown in Figure 2;● the likelihood of occurrence of each relevant lossof-control event for each work stage;● the most likely location of each construction worker during each work stage;● the logical locations that are affected by various loss-of-control events caused by the detailed work stages of other activities;● the probabilities of accident outcomes for each accident scenario that can arise from each lossof-control event;● the probabilities of use of personal safety equipment for each work stage.The CJSA knowledge base must be prepared for each national or regional construction industry because it is dependent on local working culture. For the purposes of this research, a knowledge base was prepared for the domain of multi-storey buildings with reinforced concrete structures. The procedure entailed three steps: (1) Intensive knowledge acquisition in a series of 10 half-day workshops with safety experts and senior construction superintendents, who are legally responsible for site safety, in which the patterns and nature of the risks of construction activities were identified and compiled in detail. Two researchers interviewed teams of four experts in each workshop. Seventeen activities were covered; they yielded 348 stages and 875 distinct loss-of-control events. This step provided the domain knowledge describing what loss-of-control events could be expected.(2) An extensive field survey that included 101 interviews among 91 construction superintendents, in which estimates of all of the parameters used for assessing the probabilities of loss-of-control events, as well as their expected severities, were collected. This step provided the expected probabilities of the loss-of-control events identified in the first step.(3) A series of interviews with 10 senior and highly experienced safety managers from leading large-scale construction firms to establish probabilities for the different accident scenario outcomes for the full scope of activities covered, and for the use of personal safetyTable 2	Five examples of event likelihood, including the most frequent and infrequent loss-of-control eventsActivitySub-activityStageEventAverage likelihood(occurrences per worker per year)Cast-in-place concrete walls with stone claddingPouring concrete using a crane bucketFilling bucketConcrete spatter168.0Casting lightweight concrete for drainageCasting concretePouring the concreteDropping an object91.3Drywall constructionErecting the framingAttaching studs to exterior masonry or concrete wallsSpatter of debris from drilling or nailing56.4Exterior stuccoManually applying an insulating layerCuring and cutting protrusionsStruck by a tool1.25Cast-in-place concrete columns and wallsInstalling formsCleaning and greasing formsFall from a ladder0.060Concrete columns and wallsCasting concrete with a craneLifting a bucket full of concreteCrane collapse0.0001equipment. The safety managers were identified as the most reliable source of data because of their daily experience with safety management and accident investigations in construction.Table 2 provides a brief set of examples of the results obtained in the second step.The ‘CHASTE’ modelThe ‘CHASTE’ model is a theoretical model for evaluating risk levels in construction or any other projectbased production system with dynamic environments. It conceptually defines the required input knowledge and data, the mechanisms for manipulating the data, and the parameters that affect risk levels. The following formula, which presents the risk level as a product of three independent factors—hazard, exposure and severity—lies at the heart of the model: RLijk( )t = HL jk( )t × EL tij( )× SLij	( )1where: RLijk (t) = The total risk level caused by hazard k for team or worker i as a result of each loss-of-control event j to which the team/worker might be exposed at time t.HLjk (t) = Hazard level—the time-dependent likelihood of occurrence of loss-of-control event j caused by hazard k. There are two kinds of hazards: active hazards, created by ongoing activities, for instance transporting concrete using a crane; and passive hazards, caused by negligence or omission, for instance having an unsecured elevator shaft on the work floor.ELij (t) = Exposure level—the probability that team or worker i will be exposed to loss-of-control event j. This probability changes through time, but it can be calculated explicitly for discrete time intervals. It consists of temporal exposure (being exposed to a hazard while it occurs) and spatial exposure (being at the exposed area).SLij = Severity level—the total expected severity of the potential injuries for team or worker i for all of the accident scenarios resulting from a loss-of-control event j. Calculation of this factor includes consideration for the influence of safety equipment and protective personal safety gear.Note that the terms are used as they are defined in Table 1.  The conceptual formulation of the CHASTE model is the basis for a software implementation. Figure 3 outlines the computational process. As can be seen, the model utilizes three main data sources: (1) a comprehensive construction job safety knowledge base compiled using the CJSA method;(2) a computerized construction schedule of the kind commonly maintained in most construction projects; and(3) a digital building model of the construction site and the facility under construction.The latter two are commonly available in BIM representations of construction projects (Eastman et al., 2008), which include machine-readable representations of a facility’s geometry.Figure 3 Conceptual flowchart for the CHASTE modelVarious managerial, personnel and environmental factors (such as management pressure to meet schedules, workers’ familiarity with the site and the work, degree of crowding, weather conditions, etc.) that vary according to each project’s context influence theFigure 3	Conceptual flowchart for the CHASTE modelprobabilities of loss-of-control events occurring and/or the probability of a victim being exposed to danger. These are factored into the computation of probabilities for every accident scenario generated by the activity detailer and exposure generator module. Once the accident scenarios have been detailed, the risk processor can evaluate risk levels by applying local information about the use of safety equipment and each user’s subjective assessment of the relative weights that should be applied to different levels of severity.  The following three sections explain the approach to computation for the three parts of the CHASTE model: the likelihood of loss-of-control events, the likelihood of exposure to them for each potential victim, and the expected severity of possible accident outcomes.Determining hazard levelsFor the reasons outlined in the section ‘Safety risk assessment in construction’ above, the CHASTE approach bases assessment of risk levels on the likelihood of ‘loss-of-control events’ rather than on the likelihood of accidents. The likelihood of an accident is obtained by multiplying the likelihood of a ‘loss-ofcontrol’ event by the probability of ‘exposure’ (the terms are defined in Table 1). By definition, the number of accidents is significantly smaller than the number of loss-of-control events. For every accident, there are numerous potentially dangerous events that end with no, or very little, damage.  To calculate the risk levels for any given duration of an activity on a specific project site, the first step is to determine which activities are being performed and by whom. A project schedule is the source for this information. For each activity, the CJSA knowledge base is queried to generate a detailed list of the sub-activities and stages and their associated loss-of-control events. The start and end times are determined at the resolution of the work stages by extrapolating from the activity start and end times in the schedule using typical start and end times and durations recorded in the construction method knowledge of the CJSA knowledge base.  The likelihood of occurrence for each loss-of-control event is recorded in the knowledge base for each individual work stage (e.g. ‘pouring concrete’) of each sub-activity (e.g. build concrete slab). The units for this measure are the number of occurrences expected per day, assuming continuous execution of that stage for a full working day. In any calculation instance, the likelihood of a loss-of-control event occurring during execution of a work stage is multiplied by the ratio of the duration of the stage to the duration of a day in similar units. If the likelihood must be aggregated over a whole sub-activity, it is weighted with the ratio of the duration of the stage to the duration of the subactivity.Calculating exposureThe exposure level depends on the type of activities performed and on the physical conditions at the site. The overall algorithm cross-checks information concerning expected regions of workers considering the expected timings of source and victim activities, searching for spatial and temporal exposure. The result of this entire process is the exposure level.  Two aspects independently affect the probability of a person or team being exposed to harm if a loss-ofcontrol event should occur. The first is exposure due to presence at a region at which a loss-of-control event may occur (spatial exposure), and the second is presence at a time during which the event may occur (temporal exposure).Spatial exposureSpatial exposure is defined at two levels: regional exposure and direct exposure. Regional exposure exists if there is any possibility that a potential victim will be present in a region that is exposed to an incident resulting from a loss-of-control event, while direct exposure exists if the potential victim is directly in the path of harm. A person may be present in an exposed region, but remain unharmed when a loss-of-control event occurs by virtue of not being directly in the path of harm.  Figure 4 illustrates the concept using a cause and effect diagram. For example, if a hammer is dropped from a height (a loss-of-control event), and a worker is present in the zone into which the hammer could potentially fall (he is regionally exposed), but it misses the worker (he was not directly exposed), then the result is a ‘near miss’ safety event. This distinction between accidents and ‘near misses’ is a common feature of accident causation models (Heinrich, 1980; Mitropoulos et al., 2005).Figure 4 Cause and effect diagram illustrating the distinction between regional and direct exposureThere is no practical way to predict the exact location of a worker, and so direct exposure cannot be calculated. However, the nature of each activity is known (from the CJSA database), and therefore the distribution of a worker’s presence in different zones on site can be analysed using the most detailed activity schedule available. Thus the probability of regional exposure can be computed.  Different specific spatial exposure algorithms are needed for different types of loss-of-control events, because the nature of the danger is different. Falling objects, for example, require that zones below the work zone be considered; horizontally adjacent zones and
Figure 4	Cause and effect diagram illustrating the distinction between regional and direct exposure
zones above the work zone are relevant for fire, smoke and gas related incidents; a crane overturning will affect a zone within a specific radius of its base, etc. All of the algorithms are founded on the same two assumptions: (1) that the probability of a potential victim being present at any given location within the extents of the region he or she is present in is assumed to be uniform throughout that space; and (2) that the likelihood of a loss-of-control event impacting on any given location within the extents of the possible impact region is also uniform throughout that space. These assumptions allow the probability of spatial exposure to be computed using the proportions of the spaces, as stated in Equation 2: 	Aij	Aij	Aij2ESij =	×	=	( )2	Ai	Aj	A Ai	jwhere ESij is the probability of exposure in space; Ai and Aj are the areas of the source impacted region and theFigure 5 Example of a regional exposure overlap between a zone influenced by a loss-of-control event (a piece of formwork falling from the crane) and a region in which workers perform stone claddingRozenfeld victim’s task region respectively (regions Ri and Rj);Region Rij = Ri I Rj; Aij = area(Rij).  Figure 5 illustrates an example of analysis of the spatial and temporal (4D) exposure between a source zone in which a specific loss-of-control event could occur (in this case, the event of a piece of formwork, used for the construction of the building core at the top floor, falling from the crane) and a victim zone (in which other workers perform stone cladding on a scaffold on the west facade of the building). The hatched area in the figure is the region Rij.Figure 5	Example of a regional exposure overlap between a zone influenced by a loss-of-control event (a piece of formwork falling from the crane) and a region in which workers perform stone claddingTemporal exposureTemporal exposure occurs when there is the possibility of overlap in time between a sub-activity that is the source of a loss-of-control event (the source activity) and a sub-activity that involves a potential victim’s presence in the dangerous zone (the victim activity). It  is calculated by computing the probability of overlap between the times scheduled for execution of each of the detailed work stages of the source and victim sub-activities respectively, in any case at which two sub-activities occur at the same time (as defined in Figure 6).Figure 6	Exposure in timeFigure 6 Exposure in timeThe exact intervals in time at which each work stage will be performed cannot be specifically defined, because they are often repeated in a cyclical fashion within each work stage. They also do not necessarily start in the same sequence for each work stage. At the work stage level, the proportions of the source team’s time spent performing the work stage is simply multiplied by the proportion of the victim team’s time spent on the relevant work stage. Of course, the overlap must also be established at the aggregate level of the subactivities in which each of the two work stages under consideration occurs.  At the level of detail of sub-activities, the planned start and finish times can be derived from a project’s construction plan (which details the activities and their planned primary locations) and the CJSA knowledge base (which details typical sub-activities and work stages). The temporal overlap between the subactivities can be calculated as follows, with reference to Figure 6: ● The source duration is S1 to F1, which are the expected start and finish times of the sub-activity that causes the loss-of-control event.● The victim duration is S2 to F2, which are the expected start and finish times of the exposed sub-activity.The exposure between the two overlapping activities begins at the later time SE = max(S1; S2) and ends at the earlier time FE = min(F1; F2). The temporal exposure level, ETij, is defined as the product of the proportions of the total sub-activity duration for each work stage (taken from the CJSA knowledge base), multiplied by the number of workers involved in each, and is valid for the duration from SE to FE.  Finally, as stated above, the total exposure probability is the product of the probabilities of temporal exposure and spatial exposure, both calculated by considering overlaps between the workers or teams who generate the risk and the workers or teams exposed to the same risk. Thus for any specific time period during which sub-activities overlap, the total exposure level is given by: ELij = ESij × ETij	(3)Note that direct exposure is not accounted for. As explained above, there is no practical way to predict direct exposure, and so CHASTE suffices with the accuracy that can be provided using regional exposure for the spatial exposure component. Also, the formulae and algorithms were developed thus far on the assumption that the source and the victim are separate and distinct. There are two special cases in which the distinction between source and victim does not occur,  although the method is applicable without modification: (1) Self-exposure, where a worker creates the risk to himself/herself by his/her own actions. In this case, both the temporal and spatial exposure probabilities are certain, and so the exposure probability is 100%.(2) Peer exposure, where a worker is endangered by another activity performed at the same work area as the one in which he or she is present. In this case the spatial overlap is 100%, and the temporal overlap can be calculated in the usual way.However, all of the procedures and formulae for calculating exposure up to this point are valid, without any change, for these two cases as well.Setting severity levelsThe third component of the risk level formula is the expected severity level, which is aggregated by normalizing the sum of the products of the probability of each possible outcome and the relative severity of each outcome. The expected use or non-use of personal safety equipment is also taken into account. The calculation of the severity level SL for each possible accident scenario k (where a worker is exposed to a loss-ofcontrol event) can be expressed as: SLk = P u[ ]∑w P Oi [ i ] (1+	− P u[ ])∑w P Oi	′[ i ]	(4)	i	iwhere the terms are as follows: P[Oi] and P′[Oi] are the probabilities of four possible outcomes Oi, when personal safety equipment is used P[Oui] and when it is not used P′[Oui]. The possible outcomes considered use a scale similar in concept to that of Jannadi and Almishari (2003): light injury (up to one day of absence from work—scratch or wound); minor injury (longer absence from work—burn or fracture); severe injury with permanent disability; and death.P[u] is the probability that appropriate personal safety equipment will in fact be used, and conversely 1 – p[u] is the probability that it will not be used.wi is a relative weight assigned to express the severity of outcome Oi.All of the values for P[Oi], P′[Oi], P[u] are drawn from tables in the CJSA database. The values for wi reflect the relative importance associated with each type of outcome. The CHASTE model intentionally refrains from proposing relative weights for the different ranks; the authors’ view is that this must be a subjective value judgment made by each safety expert, or company, according to their principles or according to industrywide policies.  Table 3 is an example of the detailed calculation of severity level for a scenario in which a worker who is installing formwork is struck by material falling from a palette or bucket transported by a crane. In this example, the probability of wearing a helmet is 77%; naturally, any specific user could override the values to reflect the degree of discipline of their own or of theirTable 3 Example of calculation of the expected severity for a scenario ‘struck by material transported by a crane’ while ‘assembling industrial forms for concrete slabs’	With safety equipment 	Without safety equipment Severity levelSeverity weight(77%)(23%)Weighted severity level(1) Light injury170500.7(2) Medium injury525411.4(3) Severe injury25371.0(4) Death100222.0Scenario severity level5.1subcontractors’ employees in terms of use of safety equipment.ApplicationA prototype software implementation of the CHASTE model was prepared and tested on two different construction projects. The first was a seven-storey residential building with 3000m2 floor area. Eight activities were analysed using the CHASTE method (automatic detailing of loss-of-control scenarios using the CJSA knowledge base, computation of exposures through linkage to a 4D model of the construction progress, and calculation of risk levels incorporating severity levels for every loss-of-control scenario). The activities analysed, through a total duration of six months, were: floor tiling, concrete slabs, stone cladding, concrete columns and walls, piling, drywalls, roof sealing and waterproofing. The system produced a list of 5424 possible accident scenarios. The most hazardous activity was ‘concrete slabs’; its most dangerous work stages were forming and reinforcing the slabs. The most hazardous loss-of-control event types were: struck by a tool, objects falling from a crane, and falls from height. The proportion of events that impacted on crews and workers other than those generating the hazard was 63%; 37% concerned selfinflicted risks.Figure 7 A 3D view of the regions defined for the semiconductor research building, and a site photo taken near the completion of structural works  The second project consisted of high-tech labs and offices for an international semiconductor company (Figure 7). The building has five underground floors and six above-ground floors with a total built area of over 56 000m2; the total construction cost was estimated at $80 million. The building’s structure is cast in situ concrete with precast hollow-core floor slabs. Primary finishing activities included interior masonry walls, drywalls, electrical and communication networks, plumbing, HVAC installations and elevators. The facade activities included curtain walls and stone cladding. Three tower cranes were used and the number of workers on site fluctuated from 100 to 200, depending on the stage of construction. The CHASTE analysis covered all the structural activities, masonry, drywalls and curtain wall facades for the floors above ground.Figure 7 A 3D view of the regions defined for the semiconductor research building, and a site photo taken near the completion of structural worksAt the start, a total of 39 different regions were defined in the building and on the site: 24 within the building, according to zones defined in the schedule, eight regions outside the building (storage, loading areas, offices, etc.) and seven equipment regions (cranes, concrete pumps, etc.) Each region was defined by a code, perimeter geometry, area measure and elevation.  Once set up, the CHASTE program was run each week and results were summarized. The total number of all possible scenarios predicted was 45 840. Table 4 shows a small sample of these, selected from a oneweek period. The scenarios in the table with only one line for the work stage detail are self-exposure cases, while those with two lines show the source and target work stages on the first and second lines respectively. The details of the specific trades of the workers involved in each scenario have been omitted from the table owing to lack of space, but this information is included in the raw output. A user would not be expected to work directly with these data, but rather would use reports that aggregate the data in different ways. For example, one might wish to aggregate the risks to a particular trade over a particular day, as is done for curtain-wall workers in Table 5.  The most hazardous single event was ‘hit by a tool’ while erecting scaffolds for concrete slab formwork support, and the most dangerous activity type in terms of volume of risk was concrete slab construction. The most endangered trades during this period were form workers and steel reinforcing workers. The most hazardous scenario type was ‘fall from height’. More than 62.5% of the predicted hazardous events were caused by some worker other than the one exposed. After each analysis run, the results can be filtered, analysed and reported in a variety of ways, according to region, victim or source team or trade, severity level, accident scenario type, etc. Figure 8 shows just one example of the many kinds of report that can be generated. This chart shows the total predicted risk level according to region on site for a two-week period. This kind of output helps in identifying and levelling risk peaks during the master planning. Another important report type that can be generated is a colour-coded animation of the overall risk level in each region over any given period, shown on a 3D building model view. The regions are coloured according to risk level, varying from green (least hazardous) to red (most hazardous).Figure 8	CHASTE results: Risk level chart according to regions for the period from 1 November 2007 to 14 November 2007ConclusionsThe CHASTE model is a novel approach for predicting risk levels in support of proactive safety management at construction sites. It is a time- and space-dependent model that can quantify risk levels by means of automated calculations, which enables more efficient management of construction safety. The meticulous job safety analyses of common construction tasks carried out using the CJSA approach have yielded a substantial knowledge base of loss-of-control events and their probabilities for most of the activity types common in reinforced concrete construction. The research to date has included development of the concept, workshops and interviews to build the knowledge base, implementation of a prototype software application, and tests of the software in two construction projects.  Ostensibly, the proposition that ‘it is possible to forecast safety risks in construction projects for different trades in a highly automated fashion’ has been demonstrated. However, two aspects remain to be verified: to what degree do the predicted safety risk levels correlate with safety performance, and what are the practical impacts of use of the tool on safety management in construction.  The first aspect is difficult to test for because it is impractical to fully record all of the very high number of loss-of-control events and exposures that occur on any typical site. Validation using accident statistics is also very difficult because the number of loss-of-control events and exposure scenarios that actually result in reported accidents is extremely small; in any case, accident statistics cannot be representative of any one site, and every construction project is unique.  The number of activity types that were surveyed during the CJSA in this research is only a sample of the total number of activities and methods employed on a typical construction project, and therefore, the model as implemented to date cannot yet give the whole picture at once. Further research is needed to expand the number of activities analysed. Although over 80 different construction supervisors were interviewed in the CJSA process about the trades they know best, the number of responses for each loss-of-control event, for each sub-activity and for each activity type was not large enough to allow conclusions about their distributions. In order for CHASTE to be implemented extensively, the CJSA step would need to be performed for steel or precast structures, and refined in each country, region or city, depending on local construction culture.  With a reliable and fairly precise prediction of safety risk levels, construction managers will be able to level risks by rescheduling tasks and/or by providing other solutions to reduce risks to acceptable levels. This can be done before construction starts to make master plans fundamentally safer for execution, as well as an ongoing process on site in periodic work planning
Table 5	The five most significant risk scenarios identified on a particular day for a curtain-wall workerRegion of riskSource activity & regionScenario typeSeverity (1–100)Cumulative risk levelFacade 1L4 1–6 slabsFalling object51.44397Facade 1Curtain walls facade 1Hit by a tool24.42825Facade 1Curtain walls facade 1Fall from height63.21752Facade 1L4 7–12 slabsFalling object73.1312Facade 1Curtain walls facade 1Sprayed material17.531Figure 8	CHASTE results: Risk level chart according to regions for the period from 1 November 2007 to 14 November 2007
meetings. The definition of a mature task for execution used in the Last Planner System can be extended to include the requirement that it must be safe.  The primary practical limitation discovered during the tests on site concerns the approach to using the planned construction schedule as an information source. On sites using traditional planning methods, the dynamic nature of construction lead to plans ceasing to resemble the actual work, which would render CHASTE irrelevant. The method relies on performance of production planning at a detailed level with (at least) a weekly work plan being prepared with all trades being updated in commercial software for that purpose. If the information system is updated  for other management purposes and not specifically for safety management, there is no additional overhead.  An important limitation is that the CHASTE model does not account for all of the human factors at play in construction safety that may affect the likelihood for loss-of-control occurrence or the level of exposure. While future research could establish the influence of various human and other factors on the risk level (in a fashion similar to that pursued by Hinze et al. (1998)), it is only factors whose information can be collected automatically (such as the weather, first day on site, workers’ experience, schedule delays, etc.) that can be used effectively. Other factors, (such as workers’ personal characteristics, workers’ physical and mental state, etc.) cannot be used. We reiterate therefore that risk assessments must be made by people and not by software.ReferencesBrown, D.B. (1976) System Analysis & Design for Safety, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.Carter, G. and Smith, S.D. (2006) Safety hazard identification on construction projects. ASCE Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 132(2), 197–205. CBS (2005) 2005 Employment Analysis, Table 2.1. Employed Persons by Industry, Central Bureau of Statistics, Jerusalem.Chao, E.L. and Henshaw, J.L. (2002) Job Hazard Analysis, OSHA Report OSHA 3071 2002 (revised), Occupational Safety and Health Administration, US Department of Labor, USA.Covan, J. (1995) Safety Engineering, Wiley-Interscience, New York.EASHW (2001) Work-Related Accidents in the EU: The Statistical Picture (1998–1999), available at http:// agency.osha.europa.eu/publications/factsheets/19/en/ index.htm (accessed November 2007).Eastman, C.M., Teicholz, P., Sacks, R. and Liston, K. (2008) BIM Handbook: A Guide to Building Information Modeling for Owners, Managers, Architects, Engineers, Contractors, and Fabricators, John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, NJ.Goetsch, D.L. (1996) Occupational Safety and Health in the Age of High Technology, 2nd edn, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.Griffel, A., Rosenfeld, Y., Stein, E. and Arbuzov, A. (2007) A Synergetic Model for Managing Safety and Health in Construction, Technion, National Building ResearchInstitute, Haifa, Israel.Gyi, D.E., Gibb, A.G.F. and Haslam, R.A. (1999) The quality of accident and health data in the construction industry: interviews with senior managers. Construction Management and Economics, 17, 197–204.Heinrich, H.W. (1980) Industrial Accident Prevention, 5th edn, McGraw-Hill, New York.Hinze, J., Pedersen, C. and Fredley, J. (1998) Identifying root causes of construction injuries. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 124(1), 67–71. Hinze, J.W. (1997) Construction Safety, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.Holt, A.S.J. (2001) Principles of Construction Safety, Blackwell Science, London.ILO (2003) Safety in Numbers, Report 061, International Labor Organization, Geneva.ISI (2000) Israel Standard 18001: Occupational Safety and Health Management Systems – Requirements, Israel Standards Institute, Tel Aviv, ch. 3.15.Jannadi, O.A. and Almishari, S. (2003) Risk assessment in construction. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 129(5), 492–500.Kartam, N.A. and Bouz, R.G. (1998) Fatalities and injuries in the Kuwaiti construction industry. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 30(6), 805–14.Manuele, F.A. (2005) Risk assessment & hierarchies of control. Professional Safety, 50(5), 33–9.Mitropoulos, P., Abdelhamid, T.S. and Howell, G.A. (2005) Systems model of construction accident causation. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 131(7), 816–25.PN-N (2000) Occupational health and safety management systems—general guidelines for occupational risk assessment, in Polish Standardisation Committee, PN-N-18002. Technical Standardization Committee No. 276, OHSM, Warsaw, 11 January, p. 4, para. 3.2. Radosavljevic, M., Malcolm, R. and Horner, W. (2002) The evidence of complex variability in construction labour productivity. Construction Management and Economics, 20(1), 3–12.Rosenfeld, Y., Rozenfeld, O., Sacks, R. and Baum, H. (2006) Efficient and timely use of safety resources in construction, in Fang, D., Choudhry, R.M. and Hinze, J.W. (eds) Global Unity for Safety and Health in Construction—Proceedings of the CIB W99 International Conference on Construction Safety, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 28–30 June, pp. 290–7.Rozenfeld, O., Sacks, R., Rosenfeld, Y. and Baum, H. (2007) Construction job safety analysis. Safety Science (forthcoming).Sacks, R., Rozenfeld, O. and Rosenfeld, Y. (2005) Lean scheduling for safety: development of a time-dependent risk level model, in Kenley, R. (ed.) 13th Conference of the International Group for Lean Construction, 18–21 July, Sydney,  Australia, UNSW, pp. 513–20.Tang, S.L., Lee, H.K. and Wong, K. (1997) Safety cost optimization of building projects in Hong Kong. Construction Management and Economics, 15(2), 177–86.Wang, H.-H. and Boukamp, F. (2007) Leveraging project models for automated identification of construction safety requirements, in Proceedings of the 2007 ASCE International Workshop on Computing in Civil Engineering, Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, 24–27 July, pp. 240–7.Warszawski, A. and Sacks, R. (2004) Practical multifactor approach to evaluating risk of investment in engineering projects. ASCE Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 130(3), 357–67.Womack, J.P. and Jones, D.T. (2003) Lean Thinking: Banish Waste and Create Wealth in your Corporation, Free Press, New York.Yi, K.-J. and Langford, D. (2006) Scheduling-based risk estimation and safety planning for construction projects. ASCE Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 132(6), 626–35.626	Rozenfeld et al.Hazard assessment	627626	Rozenfeld et al.Hazard assessment	627632	et al.