Construction resource/method factors influencing productivity for high rise concrete constructionD.G. Proverbs , G.D. Holt & P.O. OlomolaiyeTo cite this article: D.G. Proverbs , G.D. Holt & P.O. Olomolaiye (1999) Construction resource/ method factors influencing productivity for high rise concrete construction, Construction Management & Economics, 17:5, 577-587, DOI: 10.1080/014461999371196To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/014461999371196Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rcme20
Construction Management and Economics (1999) 17, 577± 587	Construction resource/method factors in¯ uencing productivity for high rise concrete constructionD.G. PROVERBS, G.D. HOLT and P.O. OLOMOLAIYESchool of Engineering & the Built Environment, University of Wolverhampton, Wulfruna Street, Wolverhampton WV1 1SB, UKReceived 19 September 1997; accepted 5 March 1998Research among European countries had con® rmed variance in productivity rates ascribed by construction planning engineers for identical operations. Similar differences in planned construction resource/method factors also had been identi® ed. It is hypothesized that such variance may be due to differences in contractor preference, resulting from socio-economic and corporate objective impacts. Analysis of variance and correlation tests are used to examine this hypothesis on data obtained from French, German and UK contractors. Numerous construction resource/method factors are tested for their impact on mean productivity rates for principal high rise in situ concrete construction operations. Signi® cant productivity rate variations are identi® ed for reinforcement ® xing and formwork erection, while variance in concrete placing productivity rates are not found to be dependent upon construction resource/method factors. Contractors seeking to improve productivity might wish to consider solutions for construction resource/method decisions that have been found herein to be related to higher productivity rates and (in some cases) lower costs.Keywords:	Productivity rates, in situ concrete work, resource utilization, construction methods, high rise construction
IntroductionIntroduction of the Single European Market in January 1993 marked the end of European trade barriers, a relaxation of customs regulations, and enabled free movement within the European Union. This heralded two signi® cant consequences for European contractors. First, it meant that they could tender freely for construction work located anywhere on the European continent, and compete with indigenous and perhaps other `foreign’ ® rms on an `equal’ basis. Second, it meant that indigenous contractors could expect greater competition for domestic projects, from like-minded `foreign’ contractors looking to secure continental work (Builder Group, 1997).  Recent statistics estimate European construction investment at some 690 billion ECU (approximately sterling £511 billion). This represents approximately 12% of European GDP (ECIF, 1996). Employing more than 7% of Europe’s work force, the sector is the largest industrial employer on the continent. Hence, the European construction market provides enormous potential opportunities, for those contractors able to compete successfully with their `international’ counterparts.  While investigations comparing the productivity of international construction industries have been conducted in the past (d’Arcy, 1993; Business Round Table, 1994; DoE, 1995), there exists a dearth of research into the performance of contractors internationally. Therefore, where contractors from different nations are competing for the same work, it is unclear as to which are most likely to satisfy clients’ objectives if appointed.Construction Management and EconomicsISSN 0144± 6193 print/ISSN 1466-433X online  1999 Taylor & Francis Ltd.  In seeking to resolve this uncertainty, this research has investigated European construction (planned)productivity. Utilizing a new technique, the performance and practices of UK, French and German contractors are contrasted. Previous ® ndings have indicated those contractors most likely to lead the way in a pan-European construction market (Proverbs et al., 1996, 1999a). International differences in productivity rates (for in situ concrete work) and construction resource/method factors (including transportation methods, formwork and access provisions, reinforcement fabrication methods, and various labour factors) have also been reported (Proverbs et al., 1998a,b; 1999 a± e). This paper expands on these previous works by investigating possible construction method/ resource utilization implications and focusing on the investigation of productivity rates and construction method/resource utilization factors. Not least, this con® rms those factors having signi® cant impact on contractors’ productivity rates (and subsequently their on-site performance). Where differences based on these factors do exist, possible performance enhancing recommendations are also drawn.  Findings reported indicate that certain construction method/resource utilization factors impact the productivity of principal high rise concreting operations (e.g. the choice of formwork system had a signi® cant impact on the productivity rates prescribed for such operations). Although inferences drawn in this respect do not purport to be `de® nitive’ (due mainly to limitations of sample strati® cation and size), they nevertheless provide a ® rm indication. It is further acknowledged that other factors in addition to those considered (such as health and safety, in¯ uence of unions and the very culture of the nations involved) are likely to impact productivity also. However, these ® ndings are based on a survey of key European construction players and so represent a valid and informed overview of productivity for high rise concrete construction.An overview of the research methodologyTo facilitate a (desk-based) survey of international contractors, a model high rise building and structured questionnaire were designed. A detailed account of these may be found in Proverbs et al., (1997). These research instruments were distributed to French, German and UK contractors’ planning engineers who were to assume that the model was a potentially `live’ project. Part of the questionnaire required respondents to indicate planned productivity rates for three different construction operations (formwork, reinforcement, and concrete placing). Each of these operations was subdivided further into three elements (beams, columns, and ¯ oor slabs) so a combined total of nine productivity rates were obtained. These provided the basis for performance evaluation. Respondents were asked also to indicate various construction method/resource strategies which were used as the basis for productivity impact analyses. Before the survey results a brief account of the survey methodology is now given.The research surveyThe survey involved the distribution of 280 questionnaires. One hundred and ® fty UK, 75 French and 55 German contractors were targeted. Only those ® rms experienced in in situ concrete work and of suf® cient size (i.e. minimum turnover of £7.5 million per annum) were chosen for survey inclusion (national French and German contractor organizations provided assistance in this regard). The survey (refer to Proverbs et al., 1998c, for de® nitive information) yielded positive responses from 31 UK contractors (representing a 21% response rate), 14 French contractors (19% response), and 10 German contractors (18% response), representing an overall response of 55 contractors (20%).  The sample represented a cross-section of European contractors, suf® cient in size, experience and resources to undertake the model project. This was a result of the careful method by which contractors were selected for survey inclusion. Table 1 provides an indication of the size and diversity (in terms of annual turnover) of the participating companies. An even distribution of ® rms is evident despite slight bias towards medium and large size contractors. The analyses presented herein are based on the aggregate response to the survey (i.e. a total of 55 contractors). The sample size far exceeds the minimum of 30 for `assumed normality’ and homogeneity (Freund and Simon, 1992) and it satis® es the requirements of a robust and valid statistical analysis.  In view of the fact that this research is based on a survey of contractors’ planning engineers, the importance of construction method/resource planning is now outlined. Then follows an appreciation of productivity rates prior to the research analyses.Table 1	Size of participating ® rmsNumber and percentage of contractorsCompany sizeaUKFranceGermanyTotalNo.	%No.	%No.	%No.%Small 	8	25.8535.71	10.01425Medium 14	45.2535.72	20.02138Large 	9	29.0428.67	70.02036Total31 1001410010 10055100aSmall, annual turnover # sterling £50 million; medium, annual turnover . £50 # £450 million; and large annual turnover . £450 million.Construction method/resource planningEffective construction planning requires complete understanding of each particular project. Only then can detailed methods and resource requirements (plant, labour, materials) be established, enabling the works to be carried out safely, economically and to the quality required to meet client requirements. It was rated by Arditi (1985) as the highest in¯ uencing factor for achieving construction productivity improvement. Ackoff (1970) de® ned planning as a decision making process, performed prior to action, which endeavours to develop effective methods of achieving construction designs. Design in itself also can act as an important determinant of site productivity (Nkado, 1995). `Buildability’ is ©the extent to which the design of a building facilitates ease of constructionº (CIRIA, 1983), and clearly will impact site output. However, when buildability is considered adequately at design stage, then proper planning becomes more important.  There is some confusion with regard to current planning endeavours (Laufer and Tucker, 1987). A primary responsibility of the planner when considering an in situ concrete building is to determine construction methods and resources. Hanna and Heale (1994) recommended that ©a complete list of the project’s resourcesº should be made at the planning stage. A thorough evaluation should include consideration of the following aspects: transportation, reinforcement fabrication, temporary works requirements (including formwork and scaffolding), and labour resource issues. For the three countries considered, signi® cant international differences in preferred solutions for each of these factors have been found. Now follows a brief account of their importance.  Transportation is an essential part of construction planning (Masterton and Wilson, 1995). Its analysis was de® ned by Warszawski (1973) as being essential in the planning of multi activity construction processes (as associated with in situ concrete work), and was cited as ©a vital factor in the success and pro® tability of a contractº (Contract Journal, 1982). Methods adopted can also impact productivity and motivation (Logcher and Collins, 1978; Borcherding and Garner, 1980), and therefore such decisions are critical to project success.  Reinforcement can account for almost a third of the cost of concrete work. Selecting the most appropriate method of fabrication requires a basic understanding of the construction process and its sensitivity to prevailing conditions, labour demand and practicality. The utilization of some fabrication methods (e.g. prefabricated reinforcement) has been shown to improve quality, reduce necessary labour intensity and provide faster ® xing rates (Bennett and MacDonald, 1992).  Temporary works are important also, having a critical effect on the quality, safety and pro® tability of construction projects (Ratay, 1987), and represent an area of considerable signi® cance within the construction process. For example, in extreme circumstances (such as in the construction of a complex in situ concrete bridge structure) temporary works can represent more than 60% of the contract sum (Illingworth, 1987).  Labour requirements and resource issues also are important considerations, especially for labour intensive operations such as in situ concrete work. In terms of construction performance, the workforce and management team share a strong and positive relationship (Tam and Harris, 1996). Judicious planning of labour resources can contribute towards controlling project costs, improving quality and optimizing construction output. An evaluation of labour resources therefore requires joint consideration of operatives and management.  To sum up, effective construction planning requires the rational and intelligent selection of construction methods and resources. Planning engineers can play a central role towards achieving project objectives.Productivity ratesProductivity rates represent essential data for the study of construction productivity (Herbsman and Ellis, 1990). One of their most important applications is in the area of construction planning and scheduling. Other uses include estimating, accounting and cost control. Indeed, Koehn and Brown (1986) used productivity rates to generate international labour productivity factors, and also suggested ways in which they could subsequently be applied to determine comparative international construction costs.  Most planning engineers maintain a library of `basic’ productivity rates. These basic rates are prone to adjustment for each project, taking into consideration speci® c project factors (such as design aspects) and conditions (e.g. site location) that could impact construction productivity. When calculating these rates, planning engineers need to assess design `buildability’, since this will directly affect the level of productivity achieved. Where design information is either incomplete or perhaps involves complicated processes (such as a number of return visits by certain trades), experienced planners will make due allowance for the expected harmful effects these (and other design implications) will have on productivity. Signi® cantly, Christian and Hachey (1995) in their study of productivity rates found `substantial agreement’ between the average productivity rates actually measured in the ® eld and of those used by planning engineers. Where they did ® nd differences in actual production rates (for similar operations between a number of sites), it was established that these were caused mainly by waiting and idle times (an impact of improper and/or inadequate site supervision or management). However, they reported that planners would very often modify their productivity rates for a speci® c estimate, in order to re¯ ect anticipated delay times (associated with that project). This latter point underlines the reliability of using planning engineers’ productivity rates to assess the performance of contractors both nationally and internationally. Conclusions drawn herein are based on the most accurate planning data available: that supplied by active practitioners, and considered experts, in the ® eld.Analysis of the survey dataThe following analysis is based on the aggregate response to the questionnaire survey, i.e. 55 respondents in total, comprising 31 responses from UK, 14 from French and 10 from German contractors. All statistical analyses were performed using the statistical software package, SPSS for Windows (version 7.0). The focus of the analysis is the impact of preferred construction methods/resource utilization factors indicated by respondents upon the productivity rates provided for the three main concrete operations involved. Average productivity rates for the three elements (columns, beams and ¯ oor slabs) involved in the model were used. These were considered `mean’ productivity rates for each of the operations (concrete placing, formwork erection and reinforcement ® xing). Construction methods/resource factors were investigated individually for their impact on (mean) productivity rates. These factors are as follows.Plant/material resource factors(i) Transportation methods(ii) Scaffolding systems(iii) Formwork solutions to columns, beams and¯ oor slabs(iv) Reinforcement fabricationLabour resource factors(v) Working time per day and per week(vi) Allocated of® cial break/relaxation time per day(vii) Number of days worked each week(viii) Numbers of on site supervisors/ managers(ix) Numbers of (unskilled, semi-skilled and skilled) operatives  Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was employed to test the hypotheses that the mean productivity rates (for concrete placing, formwork erection and reinforcement ® xing) attributed to the various solutions for the four plant/material resource factors (previously identi® ed) were signi® cantly different. The results of these tests are provided in Table 2. For example, using the transportation method (based on ® ve main alternatives previously indicated by respondents) as the dependent variable, variance in mean concrete placing productivity rates were investigated. The result (F statistic 2.335, P value 0.068) indicated that mean concrete placing productivity rates were the same for each transportation method (Table 2). This procedure was repeated for each of the plant/material resource factors (i.e. scaffolding systems, formwork solutions and reinforcement fabrication methods) as the dependent variables for ANOVA of mean concrete placing productivity rates. In addition to ANOVA, Tukey’s honestly signi® cant difference (HSD) post hoc test (refer to Kinnear and Gray, 1994) was subsequently applied to locate speci® c productivity differences for the solutions investigated. On completion, the process was recommenced substituting the mean concrete placing productivity rates with those for formwork erection and then reinforcement ® xing.  The authors acknowledge the assumptions underlying ANOVA (i.e. for the data to be normally distributed and to exhibit homogeneous variance) and that subsequent distribution of data accentuates the risk of violation. To minimize such risk, a 99% signi® cance level was used in the analyses. A summary of the ANOVA results is presented in Table 2, with results signi® cant at this level indicated with an asterisk.  The labour resource factors ((v) to (ix) above) were tested for association (not causation) with productivity rates using Pearson’s correlation test (refer to correlation matrix, Table 3). Here, for example, the average productivity rates for `concrete placing’ were tested for correlation with the `working time per day’ (0.010) and `working time per week’ (0.214). Such results indicating a lack of association. This was repeated for each of the labour resource factors for concrete placing productivity rates, and then again for the formwork erection and reinforcement ® xing productivity rates. A summary of these results is provided in Table 3, with signi® cant results again indicated with an asterisk.  It is important to note the de® nition of productivity rates used in this research. The `more usual’ method of de® ning productivity is output (e.g. m3 of concrete) divided by input (e.g. operative hours). For example,5 m3 concrete placed in 10 hours = 0.5 m3/hour. However, discussions with planning engineers in the UK con® rmed that their convention in the use of productivity rates was input divided by output. This convention was adopted in this research, which is also more convenient for comparison purposes. That is, productivity was expressed in terms of operativeTable 2	Summary of ANOVA resultsPlant/material resource factorsMean productivity ratesConcrete placingFormwork erectionReinforcement ® xingF statisticP valueF statisticP valueF statisticP valueTransportation methods2.3350.0680.3140.8672.0460.102Scaffolding systems0.3650.8251.2990.2830.1800.948Formwork solutions Columns2.0610.1009.2280.000*0.7480.564Beams1.4670.2264.0710.006*0.5420.706Floor-slabs0.9950.4190.5040.7732.0050.108Reinforcement fabrication methods1.8140.1742.3160.1099.1870.000*Table 3	Correlation matrixLabour resource factorsWorking timeWorking timeOf® cial 	No. of days worked No. of No. of per dayper weekbreaks	each weeksupervisorsoperativesConcrete placing0.0100.214± 0.187	0.1830.2140.164Formwork erection0.0590.216± 0.106	0.294*0.1950.182Reinforcement ® xing± 0.233± 0.146	0.305*	0.028-0.0940.075hours per unit of work, so for the above example: 10 operative hours / 5 m3 = 2 operative hours per m3 of concrete.  Now follow the results of these analyses for each of the three main operations. Discussions are limited to signi® cant results only, and therefore some factors are not described in further detail (e.g. scaffolding systems).Concrete placing productivity ratesUsing the mean productivity rates for concrete placing operations (i.e. combined productivity rate for columns, beams and ¯ oor slabs) the impact of resource factors were investigated using the methods described. Results were insigni® cant for the ANOVA tests and correlation analyses as shown in Tables 2 and 3. For example, the mean concrete placing productivity rates were tested for variance using (® ve) transportation methods (previously identi® ed) as the dependent variable. Results were not signi® cant (F statistic 2.335, P value 0.068), suggesting that mean concrete placing productivity rates ascribed to different transportation methods are the same. Similar (insigni® cant) results were derived for the other plant/material resource factors (namely, scaffolding, formwork and fabrication methods), while no signi® cant correlations between concrete placing productivity rates and the labour resource factors were discovered. Hence, this indicates that international differences reported in concrete placing productivity rates (Proverbs et al., 1998c) cannot be explained by differences in individual resource (plant, material and labour) strategies. This is of some surprise since, based on previous ® ndings, concrete placing productivity was impacted by the transportation method adopted (Warszawski, 1973). However, this research did not consider implications of using speci® c types of plant or construction method (such as particular types of tower crane). Furthermore, certain combinations of these factors (such as the use of tower cranes in conjunction with proprietary forms) could impact the productivity of this type of work. However, such analyses are beyond the scope of this paper.Formwork erection productivity ratesPlant/material resource factorsAnalysis of variance for mean productivity rates for formwork operations (operative-hours per square metre (oh/m2)) based on plant/material resource factors indicated two signi® cant ® ndings, namely for preferred formwork solutions to columns (F statistic 9.228, P value 0.000) and beams (F statistic 4.071, P value 0.006); see Table 2. These formwork solutions were classi® ed as traditional timber (e.g. plywood boards and props/clamps), steel (e.g. steel panels and frames supported on steel props and including ¯ ying forms), prefabricated (e.g. GRC column forms and precast concrete shells), proprietary (e.g. adjustable aluminium prop systems), and other forms (as speci® ed).
  Tables 4 and 5 provide descriptive statistics for these preferred formwork solutions, together with respective mean, minimum and maximum productivity rates. (Note that the productivity rates indicated for `other forms’ are inappropriate due to sampling inadequacy, and therefore they are ignored in the analyses.) The rankings here indicate the ef® ciency of the productivity rates allocated to each formwork solution (with those ranked ® rst being more productive), i.e. for Table 4, proprietary and traditional timber solutions were allocated the most and least productive rates, respectively. Details of these differing solutions and international preferences can be found in Proverbs et al., (1999d).  Table 4 indicates that variations in productivity rates for the same solutions (refer to coef® cient of variation) appear to be quite high for each type of formwork. A degree of consistency is evident among the mean productivity rates, where the least ef® cient individual rate is attributed to traditional timber (3.83 oh/m2) and the most ef® cient rate is achieved using proprietary solutions. Notably, French contractors were found to be the most productive at this type of work (Proverbs et al., 1998d), preferring proprietary formwork solutions, while UK contractors (found to be the least productive) preferred traditional timber solutions. Post hoc HSD results indicated that mean (formwork) productivity rates for traditional timber formwork were signi® cantly different from each of the other methods (excluding `other’ forms). No signi® cant differences between the productivity rates for steel, prefabricated or proprietary forms were found.  Productivity rates for formwork to beams (Table 5) indicate that `other forms’ yield the most productive rates (ranked ® rst). However, only two contractors chose `other forms’ and results may be peculiar to the individual contractor, and not signi® cant. More purposefully, prefabricated forms are ranked second, while traditional timber forms are ranked least productive. Prefabricated solutions yield the most consistent productivity rates (coef® cient of variation of 25%). Indicative of this impact, French and UK contractors (found to be most and least ef® cient at such work, respectively) preferred prefabricated and traditional solutions, respectively (Proverbs et al., 1998d,1999d). The post hoc results indicated signi® cant differences between the productivity rates of traditional timber and steel, and traditional timber and prefabricated forms. The rates for proprietary and traditional timber solutions were not found to be signi® cantly different.Cost implicationsTable 4	Formwork productivity rates for different formwork solutions to columnsNo.MeanCoef® cient ofMost ef® cientLeast ef® cientRank (1 = most Formwork solutionproductivity rateavariation (%)productivity rateaproductivity rateaproductive)Traditional timber142.24361.203.835Steel131.45310.742.404Prefabricated101.15420.441.962Proprietary171.11330.232.101Other forms11.41-1.411.413aOperative-hours per square metre.Table 5	Formwork productivity rates for different formwork solutions to beamsNo.MeanCoef® cient ofMost ef® cientLeast ef® cientRank (1 = most Formwork solutionproductivity rateavariation (%)productivity rateaproductivity rateaproductive)Traditional timber142.09340.963.395Steel151.30460.232.403Prefabricated101.22250.861.862Proprietary141.44530.873.834Other forms20.92740.441.411Operative-hours per square metre.In consideration of the model project used in the study, an economic appraisal of these ® ndings is possible. The model project contained 977.76 m2 and 1600.76 m2 of formwork to columns and beams, respectively. By multiplying the mean productivity rates for each formwork solution with the relevant quantity an indication of the likely operative-hour requirements can be established. Then a further multiplication with the all-in rate for labour (based on recently published ® gures) provides the labour costs for this operation (assuming skilled operatives would be deployed). Tables 6 and 7 provide the results of this analysis for column and beam formwork, respectively. The ® nancial implications of these results are signi® cant. For column formwork, the difference between the most productive (proprietary) and least productive (traditional timber) solutions represents a cost of over sterling £14 000. For beam formwork (ignoring the results for `other’ solutions) the consequences are more costly (a difference of over £17 000 between the least and most productive solutions). Such cost implications for contractors could mean the difference between success and failure of a tender bid.Solutions preferredContractors’ preferences for formwork solutions were reported as conforming to certain traits and characteristics associated with respective national construction industries (Proverbs et al., 1999d). A discussion of their equipment usage is now worthy of (brief) consideration. In the French construction industry, contractors mainly own plant and equipment, and the external plant hire market is not as highly developed as in the UK (CCFGB, 1993). It is therefore likely that contractors will utilize their own formwork systems (which may not always be the most desirable or suitable solution), rather than hire particular systems for each individual project. This could explain the reasons for French ® rms preferring a variety of different formwork systems. A further explanation is the preference of French architects for reinforced concrete, which historically has led to the French construction industry being geared toward this technology (Chartered Builder, 1993). Hence, the majority of contractors are equipped for reinforced concrete construction (often owning their preferred formwork systems), and economists tend not to make cost comparisons with other structural materials.  German ® rms were found to prefer proprietary forms. The German construction equipment market generally is regarded as being the largest and most innovative in Europe (Construction Europe, 1994). It is therefore of little surprise that many German contractors have moved away from traditional forms. Furthermore, German ® rms do not concentrate solely on hiring out plant to their own sites, but tend to ful® l a much wider role in temporary works fabrication (Biggs et al., 1990). Hence, their solutions are more likely to be designed and developed by each company speci® cally for individual projects.  Perhaps the most notable observation, was the preference of UK ® rms towards traditional timber formwork. This was in direct contrast to preferred practices of France and Germany. For concrete operations, the productivity of UK ® rms has been found inferior to that achieved by similar French and German ® rms. This would seem to be due, in part, to the formwork methods adopted by UK ® rms, since these (as demonstrated by these results) have a significant impact on productivity rates.Labour resource factors
Table 6	Time and cost implications for formwork solutions to columnsMean Operative-Labour Formworkproductivity hourscostssolutionrateaTraditional timber2.242190.18£27 881.02Steel1.451417.75£18 047.98Prefabricated1.151124.24£14 313.92Proprietary1.111085.31£13 816.04Other forms1.411378.64£17 550.11aOperative-hours per square metre.Table 7	Time and cost implicat solutions to beamsions for formworkMean Operative-Labour Formworkproductivity hourscostssolutionrateaTraditional timber2.093345.59£42 589.34Steel1.302080.99£26 490.98Prefabricated1.221952.93£24 860.76Proprietary1.442305.09£29 343.85Other forms0.921472.70£18 747.46Operative-hours per square metre.Using correlation tests, the labour resource factors also provided important ® ndings (Table 3). A correlation coef® cient of 0.294, at the 5% level of signi® cance was found between the number of days worked each week and the average formwork productivity rates. This indicates that weekly working schedules beyond ® ve days could be counterproductive, and supports previous research ® ndings reporting the harmful effects of overtime (Thomas, 1992). Demonstrating this relationship, UK contractors (found to be least productive of the three nations at such work) were also more likely to work more than ® ve days each week (see also Proverbs et al., 1999e). Interestingly, no signi® cant association was found between the productivity rates and the number of hours worked per day or per week (Table 3). This implies that (for formwork operations) in respect of overtime working, the number of days worked each week is more signi® cant than the number of hours worked. No other signi® cant correlations between the average formwork productivity rates and labour resource factors were found.Formwork summaryIn summary, two plant/material resource/method factors were found to impact the productivity rates for formwork operations, namely preferred formwork solutions to columns and beams. Evidence indicates that contractors choosing proprietary and prefabricated solutions for columns and beams, respectively, achieve better productivity rates. Post hoc ANOVA results indicated that traditional timber solutions should be avoided, since these manifest lower productivity. The ® nancial impact of such productivity variation was calculated for the model building and found to be of some magnitude.  For contractors working more than ® ve days each week, the productivity of formwork operations declined. This could be connected to the harmful effects scheduled overtime has on productivity. Scheduled overtime (such as working six or seven day weeks) is known to increase absenteeism, reduce effectiveness (due to fatigue) and reduce the productive output of labour materially (Business Roundtable, 1991). On extended overtime, the reduced productivity of workers for a week’s work is equivalent to or greater than the number of overtime hours worked. Results indicated that the number of days worked each week was more signi® cant than the number of hours worked. Contractors are advised to consider such implications before implementing lengthy and regular work schedules, particularly in regard to the number of days worked each week; notwithstanding this, overtime when used for particular purposes and short periods can be bene® cial and help achieve desired performance targets.Reinforcement ® xing productivity ratesPlant/material resource factorsMean productivity rates (oh/tonne) for ® xing reinforcement were analysed for each of the plant/material resource factors using ANOVA (Table 2). A signi® cant variation in productivity rates was found for reinforcement fabrication methods only (F statistic 9.187, P value 0.000). No other such resource factors demonstrated signi® cant differences in productivity rates for ® xing reinforcement. Table 8 provides descriptive statistics for these preferred fabrication methods, and productivity rates yielded for different solutions. Post hoc tests indicated that productivity rates yielded for bent and fabricated on-site methods were signi® cantly inferior to those when pre-bent or prefabricated methods were employed. There was no signi® cant difference between the productivity of pre-bent and prefabricated methods. Much more detailed discussion of these differing solutions and international preferences, can be found in Proverbs et al. (1998b).  These results support previous research which has underlined the bene® ts of using pre-bent and (particularly) prefabricated reinforcement (Bennett and MacDonald, 1992). All three fabrication methods, demonstrate high levels of productivity variation with prefabricated methods yielding the most extreme. For prefabrication to be effective, ©signi® cant changes to overall project managementº, and ©considerable offsite managementº are required (CIRIA, 1997). Contractors adopting such construction methods must take account of these organizational and managerial impacts, or possibly suffer the consequences of poor productivity. Evidence of such problems is provided by the least ef® cient individual productivity rate which was provided by a contractor utilizing prefabricated reinforcement. German contractors were found previously to prefer such prefabricated methods (Proverbs et al., 1998b), and also were found to be the most productive at these particular reinforcement operations (Proverbs et al., 1998e). Bending and fabricating of reinforcement on-site was found to occur only in France, and this could explain why French contractors were found to be the most unproductive at such operations.Labour resource factorsThe mean reinforcement ® xing productivity rates were tested for correlation with labour resource factors. This resulted in one signi® cant ® nding only (Table 3). Allocated of® cial break/relaxation time per day correlated signi® cantly with reinforcement productivity rates (correlation coef® cient 0.305, at 5% level of signi® cance). This relationship indicates that extended break/relaxation times are counterproductive. Previous research has indicated signi® cant differences in the lengths of break times and daily working times of contractors from Germany, France and the UKTable 8	Reinforcement ® xing productivity rates for different fabrication methodsNo.MeanCoef® cient ofMost ef® cientLeast ef® cientRank (1 = most Fabrication methodsproductivity rateavariation (%)productivity rateaproductivity rateaproductive)Pre-bent3420.73338.5040.511Prefabricated1527.33519.5162.002Bent and fabricated on-site632.004715.0043.003Operative hours per tonne.(Proverbs et al., 1999e). German contractors (i.e. themost productive at this work) allocated break times which were longer than those allocated by UK ® rms, but shorter than those allocated by French ® rms. It would seem therefore that a sensible balance (not too long, not too short) of of® cial breaks is optimum. (Note that break times were not found to be of signi® cance for concrete placing and formwork operations.)  In the context of break allowances, it is pertinent at this point to discuss the daily working schedules of contractors, and view the wider organizational implications of the ® ndings. Table 9 presents an overview of mean (reinforcement ® xing) productivity rates, daily working schedules, break allowances and (perhaps more meaningful) the break allowance per hour worked, as allocated by contractors from each country. From a managerial perspective, this indicates the ideal allowance for breaks as 6.24 minutes for every hour worked (the German model), since this appears conducive to productivity improvement. The French adopt a more generous managerial approach, allocating on average 7.44 minutes per hour, and yet this is linked to the lowest level of productivity. In contrast, UK contractors allocate the least time for breaks (5.64 minutes per hour), but do not achieve the same level of output as do German ® rms. This concurs with the previous ® ndings, suggesting that a suitable medium between break allowances and daily working schedules exists (for reinforcement work).Reinforcement summaryIn sum, productivity rates for reinforcement work were found to be signi® cantly different depending on the method of fabrication employed, with pre-bent solutions being the most ef® cient (although not signi® cantly better than prefabricated methods). Bending and fabricating on-site yielded the most unproductive rates for reinforcement ® xing. The length of allocated break/relaxation times correlated with the productivity rates for this operation, indicating that contractors should be careful to limit such allowances. French ® rms allocated the longest breaks and were inclined to be the most unproductive at this type of reinforcement work. The German model of allowing 6.24 minutes of relaxation time for every hour worked would seem to be productivity enhancing.ConclusionsProductivity rates and preferred construction resource/ method factors are known from previous studies to be signi® cantly different in France, Germany and the UK. Various construction resource/method factors were investigated for impact on average productivity rates (the product of individual rates for beams, columns and ¯ oor slabs) of the three principal construction operations involved in high rise in situ concrete work (namely placing concrete, erecting formwork and ® xing reinforcement). Hence, signi® cant relationships between productivity rates and construction resource/ method factors could indicate those factors found to enhance productivity.  For concrete placing productivity rates, none of the resource factors (material, plant or labour) when considered independently was found to be of signi® cance. Therefore, international variations in concrete placing productivity rates were not connected directly to these individual factors. Implications of using speci® c types of plant or construction methods as well as various combinations of the resource factors might in¯ uence the productivity of this work, but such investigations were beyond the scope of the current research. It is noted that this provides scope for future development on the theme.  Formwork productivity rates were impacted by the type of formwork utilized on column and beam work. The most unproductive rates were related to traditional timber solutions, while proprietary (for column work) and prefabricated (for beam work) solutions were associated with the most ef® cient (and hence most economic) productivity rates. The preference of French (for proprietary and prefabricated) and UK (traditional timber) contractors mirrored these productivity associations. When working more than 5 days each week, the productivity of formwork operations was found to decline.  Reinforcement ® xing productivity rates were found to vary signi® cantly depending on the fabrication method utilized, with pre-bent and prefabricated methods yielding higher productivity levels. Break/ relaxation times, when extended, were found also to correlate with lower (reinforcement) productivity rates,
Table 9	Break allowances and productivity rates (reinforcement ® xing) by countryCountryMean productivity rateaDaily working timeBreak allowanceAllowance per hour (min)UK22.409 hrs 26 mins53 mins5.64France30.359 hrs 8 mins1 hr 8 min7.44Germany17.5110 hrs 9 mins 1 hr 4 min6.24Operative hours per tonne.
and therefore contractors should not be too generous in this regard! A mean allowance of (approximately) 6 minutes per hour worked would apparently be desirable for this type of work. Length of break did not impact the productivity of formwork or concrete placing operations, suggesting that the nature of work involved may also be in¯ uential.  Contractors seeking to improve their productivity might wish to consider those solutions linked to increased productivity when undertaking high rise in situ concrete work.Acknowledgements  The authors wish to thank the EPSRC for funding this research and also numerous contractors and planning engineers in France, Germany and the UK for their generous cooperation and contributions. The constructive comments of the anonymous reviewers of the paper are also acknowledged.Referencesd’Arcy, J. (1993) The shame and the sham, in Contract Journal, 396 (5937), 12± 13.Ackoff, R.L. (1970) A Concept of Corporate Planning, Wiley, New York.Arditi, D. (1985) Construction productivity improvement, Journal of the Construction Division ASCE, 111, 1± 14.Bennett, D.F.H. and MacDonald, L.A.M. (1992) Economic Assembly of Reinforcement, British Cement Association, Slough.Biggs, W.D., Betts, M. and Cottle, M.J. (1990) The WestGerman Construction Industry± A Guide for UK Professionals, Construction Industry Research and Information Association, London.Borcherding, J.D. and Garner, D.F.(1980) Motivation and productivity of craftsmen and foremen on large projects, Transactions of the American Association of Cost Engineers, I-1.Builder Group, The (1997) Bouygues wins ® rst big UK contract, Building, 14 March, 9.Business Roundtable (1991) Scheduled Overtime Effect on Construction Projects, Construction Industry Cost Effectiveness Task Force Report C-2, Business Roundtable, New York.Business Round Table, The (1994) Controlling the Upwards Spiral: Construction Performance and Cost in the UK and Mainland Europe, The Business Round Table Limited, London.CFCGB (1993) The Business of Building in France, Chambre de Commerce Francaise De Grande-Bretagne in association with The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, London.Chartered Builder (1993) A Manager’s Guide to French Construction, pp. 5, 7± 9, 10, Chartered Institute of Building, Ascot.Christian, J. and Hachey, D. (1995) Effects of delay times on production rates in construction, Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 121(1), 20± 6. CIRIA (1983) Buildability: An Assessment, Construction Industry Research and Information Association, London.CIRIA (1997) Standardisation and Pre-assembly Snapshot, Construction Industry Research and Information Association, London.Construction Europe (1994) Germany, Construction Europe, October, 20± 32.Contract Journal (1982) Concrete mixing and placing, Contract Journal, 309 (5172), 29± 51.DoE (1995) Digest of Data for the Construction Industry, 2nd Edn, Department of the Environment, GovernmentStatistical Service, London.ECIF (1996) Annual Report, European ConstructionIndustry Federation, Brussels.Freund, J. and Simon, A. (1992) Modern Elementary Statistics, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.Hanna, A.S. and Heale, D.G. (1994) Factors affecting construction productivity: Newfoundland versus rest of Canada, Canadian Journal of Civil Engineering, 21(4), 663± 73.Herbsman, Z. and Ellis, R. (1990) Research of factors in¯ uencing construction productivity, Construction Management and Economics, 8(1), 49± 61.Illingworth, J.R. (1987) Temporary Works: Their Role in Construction, Thomas Telford, London. Kinnear, P.R. and Gray, C.D. (1994) SPSS for Windows Made Simple, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hove.Koehn, E. and Brown, G. (1986) International labor productivity factors, Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 112(2), 299± 302.Laufer, A. and Tucker, R.L. (1987) Is construction project planning really doing its job? A critical examination of focus, role and process, Construction Management and Economics, 5(3), 243± 66.Logcher, R. and Collins, W. (1978) Management impacts on labor productivity, Journal of the Construction Division ASCE, 104(CO4), 447± 61.Masterton, G. and Wilson, R. (1995) The Planning andDesign of Concrete Mixes for Transporting, Placing and Finishing, Report, Construction Industry Research and Information Association, London.Nkado, R.N. (1995) Construction time-in¯ uencing factors: the contractor’s perspective, Construction Management and Economics, 13(1), 81± 9.Proverbs, D., Olomolaiye, P. and Harris, F. (1996) Planned construction times and labour utilisation ± A comparison of UK and French contractors, Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 3(3) 219± 32.Proverbs, D.G., Olomolaiye, P.O. and Harris, F.C. (1997) Factors in¯ uencing the choice of concrete supply methods, Building Research and Information, 25(3), 176± 84.Proverbs, D.G., Holt, G.D. and Olomolaiye, P.O. (1998a) Scaffolding for high rise concrete construction: a French, German and British comparison, Proceedings of theInstitution of Civil Engineers: Structures and Buildings, 128 (1), 59± 66.Proverbs, D.G., Holt, G.D. and Olomolaiye, P.O. (1998b) Reinforcement fabrication for high rise concrete construction: French, German and UK practice. Technical paper by the Faculty of Building, ISBN 0 903 497 26 3.Proverbs, D.G., Holt, G.D. and Olomolaiye, P.O. (1998c) A comparative evaluation of concrete placing productivity rates, amongst French, German and UK construction contractors, Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 5(2), 174± 81.Proverbs, D.G., Holt, G.D. and Olomolaiye, P.O. (1998d) A comparative evaluation of planning engineers’ formwork productivity rates in European construction, Building and Environment, 33(4), 181± 87.Proverbs, D.G., Holt, G.D. and Olomolaiye, P.O. (1998e) A comparative evaluation of reinforcement ® xing productivity rates amongst European construction contractors, Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 5(4), 350± 58.Proverbs, D.G., Holt, G.D. and Olomolaiye, P.O. (1999a) Productivity rates and construction methods for high-rise concrete construction: a comparative evaluation of UK, German and French contractors, Construction Management and Economics, 17(1), 45± 52.Proverbs, D.G., Holt, G.D. and Olomolaiye, P.O. (1999b) European construction contractors: a productivity appraisal of in situ concrete operations, Construction Management and Economics, 17(2), 221± 30.Proverbs, D.G., Holt, G.D. and Love, P.E.D. (1999c) The logistics of materials management in high rise construction: factors determining the selection of in-situ concrete materials handling methods, Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, under review.Proverbs, D.G., Holt, G.D. and Olomolaiye, P.O. (1999d) Factors in formwork selection: a comparative investigation,Building Research and Information, 27(2), 109± 19.Proverbs, D.G., Holt, G.D. and Olomolaiye, P.O. (1999e) The management of labour on high rise construction projects: an international investigation, International Journal of Project Management, 17(3), 195± 204.Ratay, R.T. (1987) Temporary structures in construction ± an overview, in Temporary Structures in Construction Operations, Ratay, R. (ed), American Society of Civil Engineers, New York, pp. 1± 8.Tam, C.M. and Harris, F. (1996) Model for assessing building contractors’ project performance, Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 3(3), 187± 203.Thomas, H.R. (1992) Effects of scheduled overtime on labour productivity, Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 118(1), 60± 76.Warszawski, A. (1973) Analysis of transportation methods in construction, Journal of the Construction Division ASCE, 99(CO1), 191± 202.578	Proverbs et al.High rise concrete construction	579578	Proverbs et al.High rise concrete construction	579aa578	Proverbs et al.a578	Proverbs et al.High rise concrete construction	579578	Proverbs et al.