Construction and economic development: the case of Hong KongJames M. W. Wong , Y. H. Chiang & Thomas S. NgTo cite this article: James M. W. Wong , Y. H. Chiang & Thomas S. Ng (2008) Construction and economic development: the case of Hong Kong, Construction Management and Economics, 26:8, 815-826, DOI: 10.1080/01446190802189927To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/01446190802189927Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rcme20  
Construction Management and Economics (August 2008) 26, 815–826Construction and economic development: the case of Hong KongJAMES M. W. WONG1*, Y. H. CHIANG2 and THOMAS S. NG11Department of Civil Engineering, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong2Department of Building and Real Estate, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong KongReceived 31 August 2007; accepted 7 May 2008The role of construction in economic development is an important issue facing the construction research community, government and international development agencies. Based on empirical analyses, the complexities of the relationship between construction activity and stage of economic development in Hong Kong were examined. With time series data, Granger causality test results show that the construction output particularly the infrastructure sector drives the economic growth of Hong Kong, and not vice versa. Findings further indicate that the role of the local construction industry changes as the economy matures from newly industrializing country (NIC) to advanced industrialized country (AIC) status, as revealed by the diminishing rate of capacity addition by construction as well as the growing maintenance and repair sector. This complies with Bon’s inverted U-shaped relationship between construction activity and gross domestic product (GDP). However, the proposition of ‘volume follows share’ is not supported since the indigenous construction investments still sustain for the service-oriented economy which inevitably needs commercial development and logistics infrastructure to provide the services. The results may be significant for policy makers in NICs, in the long run, to formulate corporate and industrial policies to chart out a viable and sustainable course to revive the vigour of the industry.Keywords: Bon curve, construction industry, investments, economic development, Hong Kong.IntroductionThe construction sector has been recognized as a key engine for economic growth. Its role in national economy can be viewed in the context of the role that physical investment plays in economic development. There are three functions of capital investment namely: accumulation, efficient allocation and rapid technological catch-up (World Bank, 1993). The industry’s contribution indeed varies during the development process of an economy transforming from a rural agricultural economy into an urban industrial economy, and consequently into an urban service economy (Pietroforte and Gregori, 2006). The complexities of the relationship between an economy’s level of construction activity and the stages of economic development are considerable. Hence, this relationship has been assessed by various scholars and internationalbodies since the 1970s (e.g. Turin, 1973; Drewer, 1980; Wells, 1985).  However, existing paradigms on structural change in the construction industry, as a national economy develops over time, tend to be based on cross-sectional data across countries rather than longitudinal studies based on a country’s time series statistics. Many studies focused on the simple relationship between the gross value/value added of construction output and GDP/ GDP per capita. Crosthwaite (2000) utilized crosssectional analysis and verified the inverted U-shaped relationship between construction spending share in GDP and GDP per capita as advocated by Bon (1992). Jin et al. (2003) also found a non-linear relationship between the share of construction output in GDP with the GDP per capita across 34 countries and regions. Mostly the phenomenon was explained by reference to the change of growth rate in construction output at different stages of economic development.Cross-sectional analysis has its limitations due to the*Author for correspondence. E-mail: jmwwong@hkucc.hku.hkheterogeneity of the built environment in differentConstruction Management and EconomicsISSN 0144-6193 print/ISSN 1466-433X online # 2008 Taylor & Francis http://www.tandf.co.uk/journalsDOI: 10.1080/01446190802189927  
countries. Beside the stages of economic development, many factors such as geographical size, topology of land and even culture vary enormously between countries (Yiu et al., 2004). Without controlling these differences, any conjecture as to the relationship between construction growth and economic growth becomes implausible. A more direct approach is to make use of longitudinal (or time series) analysis, which studies data series of a single country or city along a certain period of time. It controls the characteristics of the built environment as constant, unless there is structural change in the industry. A number of scholars (e.g. Crosthwaite, 2000; Yiu et al., 2004) also called for longitudinal analysis to explore this longitudinal relationship between the growth rates of construction output and the economy.  There have been, over the past three decades, only a few studies which are based on macroeconomic time series analysis. Those studies have attempted to model the relationship between the construction and economic development but have usually been hampered by problems of data quality and availability. Lopes and Ruddock (1997) and Lopes et al. (2002), for instance, carried out the analysis but pertaining to developing countries of Africa. Tse and Ganesan (1997) and Yiu et al. (2004) assessed the relationship between construction flow and GDP in Hong Kong. As they explored causality only, the role of construction in the process of economic growth in terms of share and volume was not examined.  With the availability of longer time series of data across structural changes in the development of the Hong Kong economy in general and her construction industry in particular, an examination of the validity of Bon’s proposition is, therefore, conducted and the role of the construction sector critically examined in this paper. Specifically, the following key research questions are investigated to explore the relationship between the complexities of the construction activity and the stage of economic development using the Hong Kong data:(1) Is there a significant change in the mix of construction demand as Hong Kong develops?(2) Does construction cause economic growth or vice versa?(3) Does the construction industry of Hong Kong follow an inverted U-shaped relationship between construction spending share in GDP and GDP? Does volume follow share?(4) What are the implications for existing knowledge and areas of further research?  The case of Hong Kong is interesting and suitable because her transition from an emerging economy to a developed one suggests that the role of construction over the entire economic development process can be empirically evaluated. In addition, previous examinations of the role of the construction sector are limited to the national level. Investigations have seldom been made at the regional or metropolitan levels. The findings of this study are imperative for policy makers and contribute knowledge to the understanding of the construction process and economic growth. The study could also shed light on the benefits of physical investment on the national economy, especially in industrialized countries. Hence, the construction development model identified in this study will be particularly valuable to maturing cities like Shanghai, Guangzhou and Macau in Mainland China, emerging metropolises in the Middle East including Dubai, Bahrain and Doha as well as other capitals worldwide.  The structure of the paper is as follows: the theoretical background regarding the relationship between the construction sector and economic development is introduced in the next section. The hypothesis is also set out. The data and research method are then discussed. The results of the empirical analyses are subsequently presented and discussed prior to concluding remarks.Construction and economic developmentThe role which construction activity plays in the social and economic development of nations has been studied for several decades, the studies having been given impetus by realization of the linkages between construction activity and the rest of the economy (Hillebrandt, 2000). Turin (1969, 1973) initially showed positive and significant log-log linear correlations between GDP and various building parameters (e.g. construction value-added as a percentage of GDP; gross output of construction as a percentage of GDP) on the basis of cross-section data for 87 low and middle-income countries for the period of 1955–65. Similar relationships were exposed by Strassmann (1970) although the findings were derived from a relatively smaller sample of countries. They argued that as the construction industry provides the necessary infrastructure and productive facilities, it must grow faster than the economy as a whole. In addition, Anaman and Osei-Amponsah (2007) analysed the causality links between the growth in the construction industry and the growth in the macro-economy of Ghana, measured by the GDP based on a simpleGranger causality test using time series data from 1968 to 2004. The study contended that the construction industry is a major driver of the economic growth in Ghana.  Bon (1992), however, points out the problem with Turin’s and Strassmann’s analyses, which were largely focused on developing countries. Drewer (1980) and Ofori and Han (2003) also criticized the Turin– Strassmann hypotheses and models for: (1) poor data quality; (2) absence of corrections for output quality, prices and factor substitutions; and (3) assumption of a ‘natural’ development path, i.e. construction must constitute particular proportions of GDP for economic growth. Drewer used data from countries included in the UN Economic Commission for Europe region and concluded that more construction does not necessarily mean a higher level of economic development.  Examining the changing role of the construction sector at various stages of economic development in developed countries including the USA, UK, Japan, Italy, Finland and Ireland, Bon (1992, 2000) concluded that construction activity follows an inverted U-shape relationship, not only in terms of the construction share in total GNP1 but also in terms of total construction volume, as an economic system develops from less developed country (LDC) to newly industrializing country (NIC) and to advanced industrialized country (AIC) eventually with time, as graphically shown in Figures1 and 2.  This notion is well explained by Tan (2002, p.593): ‘In low income countries, construction output is low. As industrialization proceeds, factories, offices, infrastructure and houses are required, and construction as a percentage of GDP reaches a peak in middle-income countries’. Wells (1986) suggested that as a nation’s GDP increases, construction constitutes an increasing proportion of GDP, and this rate of increase is the fastest when the country passes through the middleincome range. As the economy matures, the growth then tapers off as the infrastructure becomes more developed and housing shortages are less severe or eliminated.  Bon (2001) argued that the provision of new capacity is replaced by more efficient deployment of existing capacity. In other words, a mature construction sector tends to add new capacity at a lower rate than duringFigure 1	Share of construction in GNP versus GNP percapita (Bon, 1992)Figure 2	Construction volume over time (Bon, 1992)the early stages of economic development (Pietroforte and Gregori, 2006). These modest returns are expected in highly industrialized countries with a well-developed transportation infrastructure. An important aspect of the proposition is that, in the early stages of development, the share of construction increases but ultimately declines, in relative terms, in industrially advanced countries. Even at some stages, the decline is not only relative but also in absolute terms, i.e. ‘volume follows share’ in the long run (Bon, 1992; Tan, 2002). This theory about construction’s share in economic development runs counter to the argument first advanced by Turin (1973).  As also described by Maddison (1987), in the last century, economic development has been characterized by ‘the bell shaped pattern of relative industrialization and de-industrialization’. The contribution to GNP by both the construction and manufacturing sectors starts to decline as an economy matures, while the services industry becomes the new engine of the AICs’ economy. At the same time, the capital stock that was generally built in the early stages of economic growth tends to age over time. Crosthwaite (2000) also confirmed the non-linear (inverted U-shaped) relationship between construction spending as a share of GDP and GDP per capita, using cross-sectional data of 150 countries.  On the other hand, Turin’s studies pointed out that the proportion of civil engineering works in the total construction output of developing countries is higher than that in their industrialized counterparts. The mix of construction demand and output changes as an economy develops. This derives directly from the importance of capital formation in setting the basis for economic development. Consequently, the share of maintenance and repair work has upsurged to approximately 50% of the total construction volume in highly developed countries (Pietroforte and Gregori, 2003). Productivity in construction at this stage will be stagnant, if not declining. One primary reason is indeed the increasing share of maintenance and repair work in total construction, which is more labour intensive than new construction.  Hong Kong is classified as an advanced industrialized city (World Bank, 2006), and it is reasonable to speculate that her construction industry would follow the inverted U-shaped relationship between construction spending share in GDP and GDP along with the diminishing construction volume as suggested by Bon (1992). The transformation of the construction demand as the economy develops is also evaluated. Whether the construction sector and the aggregate economy are segmented or interdependent is also explored here through an examination of the specific lead-lag causal relationships between construction flow and GDP.Data and research methodThe indicator of construction industry used for this study is the gross value of construction works (GVCW). Data of GVCW in real terms are available from the Report of Quarterly Survey of Construction Output published by the Census and Statistics Department (various years) of The Government of Hong Kong SAR. The reports provide data of quarterly real expenditure-based gross domestic product (GDP). All time series data used in this study are in real terms to discount price inflation. The data period ranges from the first quarter of 1983 to the fourth quarter of 2006, giving in total 96 quarterly points within a span of 24 years (Figure3).  As stipulated by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, income as reflected by the GDP per capita can be used for classifying economies. Advanced industrialized countries (AICs) are categorized as high-income economies with per capita GDP of US$11 116 or more. Newly industrializing countries (NICs) are categorized as middle-income economies with per capita GDP of between US$906 and US$11 115. Less developed countries (LDCs) are categorized as low-income economies with per capita GDP of US$905 or less (World Bank, 2006). Using this categorization, Hong Kong may be classified as a developing country from 1974 to 1988 when GDP per capita increased from US$1000 in 1974 to US$10 599 in 1988; and classified as a developed country since 1989 when GDP per capita started to increase from US$12 091 to US$29 851 in 2007. In addition, according to the World Bank figures, Hong Kong has the characteristics of a developed economy, for example, Hong Kong ranked sixth in terms of GDP per capita in purchase power parity, the highest in Asia; the share of maintenance and repair works increased from 21% in 1998 to 54% in 2006; there is an ageing population as occurring in other advanced economies such as Japan, etc. These factors show that the coverage of the data used in the study should be sufficient to justify the assertion of Hong Kong’s transition from an industrialized economy to an advanced industrialized economy and to show the role of construction in economic development.Figure 3	GVCW and GDP time series in Hong Kong  In this study, the historical trend of the Hong Kong construction volume is first plotted to scrutinize the relationship between construction spending and GDP as well as the change in mix of construction demand over time. To test whether construction flow stimulates the aggregate economy or the aggregate economy leads construction activity, or if feedback effects between the two macroeconomic indicators exist, the Granger causality test is applied. Augmented Dickey–Fuller (ADF) unit root test (Dickey and Fuller, 1979) is conducted to test the stationarity of the series so as to ensure that relationship, if any, would not be spurious. Specifically, the ADF tests developed by Dickey and Fuller (1979) and extended by Said and Dickey (1984) are employed for this study, which is based on the following auxiliary regression:Xp	Dyt~azd tzc yt{1z biDyt{izut	ð1Þi~1The variable Dyt2i expresses the lagged first differences, ut adjusts the serial correlation errors and a, b and c are the parameters to be estimated. This augmented specification was used to test for H0 : c~0 vs. Ha : cv0 in the auto-regressive (AR) process.  The specification in the ADF tests is determined by a ‘general to specific’ procedure by initially estimating a regression with constant and trend, thus testing their significance. Additionally, a sufficient number of lagged first differences are included to remove any serial correlation in the residuals. In order to determine the number of lags in the regression, an initial lag length of eight is selected, and the eighth lag is tested for significance using the standard asymptotic t-ratio. If the lag is insignificant, the lag length is reduced successively until a significant lag length is obtained. Critical values simulated by MacKinnon (1991) were used for the unit root tests.  If the GVCW and GDP series were non-stationary in level terms, the differenced terms of the time series will be used in the Granger causality test. Granger (1969) put forward the causality test by testing the null hypothesis that b0i50 in the following bivariate regressions:XnlogGDPt~a0z a0ilogGDPt{ii~1ð2Þ  Xn z b0ilogGVCWt{izmti~1XnlogGVCWt~a0z a0ilogGVCWt{ii~1ð3Þ  Xn z b0ilogGDPt{izmti~1  The causality test attempts to assess how much of the current GDP can be explained by past values of GDP itself and then to see whether adding lagged value of GVCW can improve the explanation, and vice versa. The economic growth is said to be Granger-caused by construction activities if GVCW helps in the prediction of GDP, or equivalently if the coefficients on the lagged GVCW are statistically significant (QMS, 2000). Since the number of lags in the causality model is arbitrary, the regression is run thrice by setting the order of lags at 4, 8 and 12 to ensure adequate relevance of past information.  On the other hand, the role of construction in the economic development of Hong Kong is examined by relating GDP with various parameters including rate of construction growth, gross output of construction as a percentage of GDP and as per capita, fitted with the longitudinal quarterly data series. Regression technique was used as it is the most commonly used and versatile dependence technique, allowing the examination of the optimal causal relationship between the explanatory variable(s) and the dependent variable (Chatterjee and Hadi, 1988; Hair et al., 1998).Findings and discussionFigure4 depicts the trends of the volume of construction work (quarterly) in different sectors in Hong Kong over the past 25 years. Construction volume in Hong Kong was increasing along with early stages of economic development and industrialization in the 1980s. However, the volume of works has been declining since its peak in 1997 primarily because of the Asian financial crisis. The GVCW in 2006 shrank to HK$96 billion, which was only 64.7% of its peak of $139 billion in 1997.  By sketchily scrutinizing the construction volume of the territory, an inverted U-shaped pattern as advocated by Bon (1992) is evident showing that Hong Kong has transformed to a mature economy with a diminishing reliance on the construction sector. This proposition could be further validated by observing the decrease in the percentage contribution to the GDP (Figure5). The construction sector was overtaken by the electricity, gas and water sectors in 2005 when, for the first time since 1980, it only ranked fourth among all sectors.  The historical trend of the overall construction output over the economic development process lays a  solid foundation for further examination of the change in the mix of construction demand (i.e. buildings, civil engineering works; maintenance and repair works) as the city grows. A significant decrease in building works is noted to be mainly due to the combined effects of a superfluous supply of residential stocks, the AsianFigure 4	Quarterly GVCW at constant (2000) market prices in Hong Kong (1983–2006) (Census and Statistics Department,various years)economic turmoil in 1997 and the SARS outbreak in 2003. On the other hand, the volume of civil engineering works also decreased by more than two-thirds (69.5%) between 1997 and 2006, as a result of the completion of the new towns, the new airport and its road and rail links and associated infrastructure projects. Structural change appeared to have occurred in the civil engineering sector.  However, the maintenance and repair sector has been on an upward trend since the 1980s. The sector has climbed dramatically since 2004 reaching $48.3 billion in nominal terms in 2006, when it contributed53.6% to the total construction market, i.e. up by 72.3% in real terms over the period since 1995. This reflects the increasing number of ageing buildings and changing demand in the construction industry. The share of new works and maintenance works changed from 77.9% to 47.9% of the gross value of construction output and from 22.1% to 52.1% respectively between 1997 and 2006. The change in demand mix not only lends support to the proposition made by Bon (1992) and Turin (1973), but also follows most of the postindustrial economies (Carassus, 2004).  ADF tests were initially conducted to determine the integrated order of the GVCW and GDP series. Table1 reports the results of the unit root tests. These statistics indicate that the unit root can be rejected for the first difference but not the levels for the two data series at the 5% significance level. Hence, the output figures are integrated of order one, i.e. I(1) series. This study therefore uses the first differenced terms of the time series for the Granger causality tests. The results of the Granger causality tests, as shown in Table2, indicate that construction activity does not Granger cause the GDP as its null hypothesis could be rejected. This implies that the growth of the construction sector leads to general economic growth but not vice versa, at least in the medium term (8 and l2 quarterly lags). The result also indicates that the past values of GVCW help predict the GDP in Hong Kong.Figure 5	Contribution of GVCW to GDP in Hong Kong (Census and Statistics Department, various years)Table 1	Augmented Dickey–Fuller (ADF) unit root testsVariableTest statisticsCritical valuesVariableTest statisticsCritical valuesLog GVCW0.2370 [8]21.9439D log GVCW24.4448 [3]*21.9437lOg GDP21.7874 [C,7]22.8943D log GDP25.1045 [1]*22.8943Notes: GVCW5gross value of construction works; GDP5gross domestic product. D is the first difference operator. The content of the brackets [?] denotes constant, trend and the order of augmentation of the ADF test equation, respectively. *5Rejection of the null at the 5% significancelevel.The direction of the causality tests contradicts the findings of Yiu et al. (2004) and Tse and Ganesan (1997), primarily owing to the longer time series dataset covering more ‘AIC period’ with the longer time lags to observe the causation between the two variables. Causality tests were further conducted at the sub-sectors level (broadly categorized into building, civil engineering, and maintenance and repair). It was found that only the civil engineering sector Granger causes GDP (see TablesA1 to A3 in the Appendix). Analogous to the Japanese construction sector, the Hong Kong construction sector also has a strong ‘pull effect’, which is the reason why the SAR Government has launched large-scale public construction projects to stimulate the economy during the past few decades.Table 2	Results of the Granger causality testsF-statisticsNull hypothesisAt 4 lagsAt 8 lagsAt 12 lagsD log GVCW does not Granger cause D logGDP3.2026*2.3668*2.2884*D log GDP does notGranger cause D logGVCW2.7247*1.79691.2263Note: * Significant at the 5% level.  The result echoes the proposition of the World Bank (1984) and Ofori (1990) that construction serves as an engine or a stimulus of growth throughout the economy. Hillebrandt (2000) also argued that investment in construction is important in fixed capital formation and thereby the economy. An increase in construction activity may cause an upsurge in income, employment and consequently the demand for other products. In terms of macroeconomic interdependence, investment in construction, as a major component of a nation’s physical capital, is an important tool in the management of the group of interrelated processes of economic growth (Kuznets, 1968).Figure 6	Relationship between GDP growth rate and GVCW growth rate  Figure6 shows the relationship between GDP growth and construction output growth. The result of the linear regression analysis indicates that a 1% increase of construction output growth may bring 0.15% growth in GDP; however, the relationship is fairly weak. Although the linear relationship between the two indicators echoes the finding of Crosthwaite (2000), the construction growth explains a mere 4.9% of the variation in GDP growth. This implies that the growth of construction spending may not significantly drive the growth of construction output. However, the result shows that how construction growth relates to GDP growth primarily depends on the economic development stage. For instance, given the same GDP growth, the construction growth at a time when Hong Kong is maturing as an AIC would be less than when Hong Kong was still a NIC. The result echoes the Bon curve and the notion advocated by Wells (1986) and Tan (2002) that contribution of construction to GDP diminishes as the economy matures.  Figure7 shows the scatters of construction spending as a share of GDP and GDP per capita. A reasonably strong association is found between the two indicators, as revealed by the high t-ratios of the estimated coefficient and the coefficient of determination (R2), between these two variables. The identified relationship (construction share of GDP5109.8 – 21.5 log GDP per capita) implies that the higher the GDP per capita in the general economic development, the lower the share of construction in GDP. The trend identified also corresponds with the ‘later half’ of Bon’s inverted Ushaped curve, as the local construction share has been declining and reached a relatively low share in recent times,reflecting the transitionof the Hong Kong economy from NIC to AIC across the study period (1983–2006).  The construction share in the GDP is maintained at about 5%, a level that has stabilized and been sustained in the highly developed countries (Carassus, 2004). Instead of diminishing further, construction share would remain at this relatively insignificant but stable level when an economy is highly developed. Even if Hong Kong has developed into an AIC, there is a continuing demand for construction works. Even a service-oriented economy such as Hong Kong still needs commercial development and logistics infrastructure to provide the services. In addition, population growth together with the higher national income would drive for investment and better standards of living and thereby the level of construction activity (Tse and Ganesan, 1997; Hillebrandt, 2000).  An inverted V-shaped relationship was found between construction spending per capita and GDP per capita as shown in Figure8. The estimated regression equation (GVCW per capita52 41.4 +19.6 log GDP per capita 2 2.1 (log GDP per capita)2) shows a non-linear relationship where the coefficient of (log GVCW per capita)2 was significantly negative. This supports the hypothesis that construction investment is a marginal diminishing function with the GDP in the economic development process of an advanced industrialized city. The Vshaped rather than U-shaped curve is identified because of the substantial increase of construction work generated from the Port and AirportFigure 7	Relationship between GVCW as a share of GDP and GDP per capitaDevelopment Strategy (PADS) and aggressive public housing programme launched by the government between 1994 and 1998 with construction volume above HK$120 billion. It is also interesting to note that although the GVCW followed the Bon curve as shown in Figure2, the construction share has been decreasing as Hong Kong developed from a NIC to an AIC, because of the relatively low GDP in the early 1980s but steady growth in economic development.  The GVCW per capita is at its highest during a specific range of log GDP per capita (i.e. 4.6–4.7, primarily massed between 1992 and 2000). This period was the ‘recovery period’ after the Gulf War and before the Asian financial turmoil in 1997. Since construction activity is very sensitive to credit conditions (Tse and Ganesan, 1997), understandably investors became optimistic, which might have resulted in over-building. In Hong Kong, subsequent to the financial turmoil and the SARS outbreak, the local market essentially needed time to absorb the excess capacity and to adjust. However, it is observed from the recent data in Figures 4 and 8 that despite the shrinking volume of new building and civil engineering construction, the trend appears not to have supported Bon’s (1992) proposition that the decline of construction industry activity switches from relative to absolute decline as the economy develops and matures (i.e. ‘volume follows share’). Instead, this is consistent with the findings of Carassus (2004) and Ruddock and Lopes (2006).ConclusionsThe role of construction in economic development is an important issue facing the construction research community, government and international development agencies. A development pattern for the industry was presented based on various stages of development of an economy at a metropolitan level. Clearly from this study it transpires that there is a relationship between construction activity, economic growth and economic development. Based on the time series data in Hong Kong, the analysis shows that particularly the infrastructure sector drives the growth of general economy, and not vice versa. The trends of construction output in key sectors show that the construction expenditure in maintenance and repair is growing, indicating a noticeable transformation of the product mix in the industry across time.Figure 8	Relationship between GVCW per capita and GDP per capita  The local construction share has been declining gradually as the economy becomes mature with developed infrastructure, housing and related facilities, suggesting that the role of construction changes as economic development transforms from NIC to AIC status. The trend of construction share in Hong Kong reveals that as economic development moves to its advanced mature stage, the share in GDP diminishes and therefore the importance of its role in economic development also declines. The comparison between the construction volume per capita and GDP per capita in Hong Kong further shows an inverted V-shaped relationship. However, the decreasing trend of the construction volume has been moderating, which may not comply with Bon’s ‘volume follows share’ proposition.  This is evidence for the proposition that the Hong Kong construction sector is following a development path similar to that of construction sectors in other advanced industrial countries. The results are significant for policy makers in that, in the long run, it is government macroeconomic policy to stimulate the growth of the general economy via construction activity, but not vice versa. The benefits of physical investment on the construction industry are explored, especially for the NICs and maturing cities that are similar to Hong Kong. However, the limitation of time series analysis is the assumption of no structural change of the industry over time. It needs further study with panel data methodology to enable comprehensive analysis and validation using both cross-sectional as well as longitudinal analysis.AcknowledgementsThe authors are grateful to the Construction Industry Institute, Hong Kong for funding this study. Financial support from The University of Hong Kong through its CRCG Seed Funding for Basic Research (grant no.:10207434) is also gratefully acknowledged. Additionally, the helpful comments from five anonymous referees are respectfully acknowledged.Notes1. GNP is same as GDP for non-tradable goods such as construction goods, according to Bon (1992).ReferencesAnaman, K.A. and Osei-Amponsah, C. (2007) Analysis of the causality links between the growth of the construction industry and the growth of the macro-economy in Ghana. Construction Management and Economics, 25(9), 951–61.Bon, R. (1992) The future of international construction: secular patterns of growth and decline. HabitatInternational, 16(3), 119–28.Bon, R. (2000) Economic Structure and Maturity, Ashgate Publishing Ltd, Aldershot.Bon, R. (2001) Comparative stability analysis of demand side and supply side input–output models: toward an index of economic maturity, in Lahar, M.L. and Dietzenbacher, E. (eds) Input–Output Analysis: Frontiers and Extensions, Macmillan, London, pp. 338–48.Carassus, J. (2004) The Construction Sector System Approach: An International Framework, CIB Publication 293, CIB, Rotterdam.Census and Statistics Department (various years) Report of Quarterly Survey of Construction Output, Census and Statistics Department, The Government of Hong Kong SAR, Hong Kong.Chatterjee, S. and Hadi, A.S. (1988) Sensitivity Analysis in Linear Regression, John Wiley and Sons, New York.Crosthwaite, D. (2000) The global construction market: a cross-sectional analysis. Construction Management and Economics, 18(5), 619–27.Dickey, D.A. and Fuller, W.A. (1979) Distribution of the estimators for autoregressive time series with unit roots. Journal of American Statistical Association, 74, 427–31. Drewer, S. (1980) Construction and development: a new perspective. Habitat International, 5(4), 395–428.Granger, C.W.J. (1969) Investigating causal relations by econometric methods and cross-spectral methods. Econometrica, 37(3), 424–38.Hair, J.F., Anderson, R.E., Tatham, R.L. and Black, W.C. (1998) Multivariate Data Analysis, 5th edn, Prentice-Hall International Inc., New Jersey, USA. Hillebrandt,	P.M.	(2000)	Economic	Theory	and	theConstruction Industry, Macmillan Press Ltd, London.Jin, W., Lu, X. and He, Y. (2003) A regression model of the growth path of construction industry. Chinese Civil Engineering Journal, 36(3), 105–9 [in Chinese]. Kuznets, S. (1968) Towards a Theory of Economic Growth, W.W. Norton, New York.Lopes, J. and Ruddock, L. (1997) A model of interdependence between the construction sector and the general economy for the developing countries of Africa, in Thorpe, A. (ed.) Proceedings of the Twelfth ARCOM Conference, Sheffield Hallam University, Loughborough, 11–13 September, pp. 456–79.Lopes, J., Ruddock, L. and Ribeiro, F.L. (2002) Investment in construction and economic growth in developing countries. Building Research & Information, 30(3), 152–9.MacKinnon, J.G. (1991) Critical values for cointegration tests, in Engle, R.F. and Granger, C.W.J. (eds) Long-run Economic Relationships: Reading in Cointegration. Oxford University Press, pp. 267–76.Maddison, A. (1987) Growth and slowdown in advanced capitalistic economies. Journal of Economic Literature, 25(2), 649–97.Ofori, G. (1990) The Construction Industry: Aspects of Its Economics and Management, Singapore University Press, Singapore.Ofori, G. and Han, S.S. (2003) Testing hypothesis on construction and development using data on China’s provinces, 1990–2000. Habitat International, 27(1), 37– 62.Pietroforte, R. and Gregori, T. (2003) An input–output analysis of the construction sector in highly developed economies. Construction Management and Economics, 21(3), 319–27.Pietroforte, R. and Gregori, T. (2006) Does volume follow share? The case of the Danish construction industry. Construction Management and Economics, 24(7), 711–15. QMS (Quantitative Micro Software) (2000) LLC, Eviews 4.0 Users’ Guide, Irvine, California.Ruddock, L. and Lopes, J. (2006) The construction sector and economic development: the ‘Bon curve’. Construction Management and Economics, 24(7), 717–23.Said, E.S. and Dickey, D.A. (1984) Testing for unit roots in autoregressive-moving average models of unknown order. Biometrika, 71(3), 599–607.Strassmann, P. (1970) The construction sector in economic development. Scottish Journal of Political Economy, 17(3), 390–410.Tan, W. (2002) Construction and economic development in selected LDCs: past, present and future. Construction Management and Economics, 20(7), 593–9.Tse, R.Y.C. and Ganesan, S. (1997) Causal relationship between construction flows and GDP: evidence from Hong Kong. Construction Management and Economics, 15(4), 371–6.Turin, D.A. (1969) The Construction Industry, UNIDO, Vienna.Turin, D.A. (1973) The Construction Industry: Its Economic Significance and Its Role in Development, UCERG, London.Wells, J. (1985) The role of construction in economic growth and development. Habitat International, 3(1), 33–45.Wells, J. (1986) The Construction Industry in Developing Countries: Alternative Strategies for Development, Croom Helm, London.World Bank (1984) The Construction Industry: Issues and Strategies in Developing Countries, World Bank, Washington, DC.World Bank (1993) The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy, Oxford University Press, New York. World Bank (2006) World Bank Atlas 2006, World Bank, Washington, DC.Yiu, C.Y., Lu, X.H., Leung, M.Y. and Jin, W.X. (2004) A longitudinal analysis on the relationship between construction output and GDP in Hong Kong. ConstructionManagement and Economics, 22(4), 339–45.  
AppendixGranger causality tests by broad construction sectorTable A1	Results of the Granger causality tests: building sectorF-statisticsNull hypothesisAt 4 lagsAt 6 lagsAt 8 lagsLog building works does not Granger cause logGDP1.42721.65951.5988Log GDP does not Granger cause log building works1.90971.08891.5057Note: * Significant at the 5% level.Table A2	Results of the Granger causality tests: civil engineering sectorF-statisticsNull hypothesisAt 4 lagsAt 6 lagsAt 8 lagsLog civil engineering works does not Granger cause log GDP0.53273.4345*2.7908*Log GDP does notGranger cause log civil engineering works2.38801.82251.6063Note: * Significant at the 5% level.Table A3	Results of the Granger causality tests: repair and maintenance sectorF-statisticsNull hypothesisAt 4 lagsAt 6 lagsAt 8 lagsLog repair and maintenance works does notGranger cause logGDP0.65080.55390.3682Log GDP does not Granger cause log repair and maintenance works1.65851.12730.8197Note: * Significant at the 5% level.      816	Wong et al.  Economic development	817    