Does a supportive work environment moderate the relationship between work‐family conflict and burnout among construction professionals?Helen Lingard & Valerie FrancisTo cite this article: Helen Lingard & Valerie Francis (2006) Does a supportive work environment moderate the relationship between work‐family conflict and burnout among construction professionals?, Construction Management and Economics, 24:2, 185-196, DOI:10.1080/14697010500226913To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/14697010500226913Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rcme20  
Construction Management and Economics (February 2006) 24, 185–196Does a supportive work environment moderate the relationship between work-family conflict and burnout among construction professionals?HELEN LINGARD1* and VALERIE FRANCIS21School of Urban Development, Queensland University of Technology, Australia2Faculty of Architecture, Building and Planning, The University of Melbourne, AustraliaReceived 10 December 2004; accepted 15 June 2005Research findings concerning the extent to which various forms of support in the workplace moderate the stressor-strain relationship are inconsistent. The effect of perceived organizational support (POS) and support from supervisors and co-workers in the relationship between work-family conflict (WFC) and burnout was examined in a sample of 202 construction professionals and managers. The results revealed that POS has a main effect on burnout and also moderates the relationship between WFC and burnout. The effect of social support did not differ according to its source. Effects for supervisory and co-worker support were similar. However, different effects were found for different types of support. Emotional support had a main effect on burnout but not a moderating effect in the WFC-burnout relationship. Practical support had a moderating effect, but not a main effect on burnout. The importance of supportive work environments to the success of interventions designed to alleviate or prevent employee burnout is discussed.Keywords: Work-family conflict, burnout, social support, co-workers, supervisors, perceived organizational supportIntroductionWork-family conflictIn recent years the extent to which work interferes with aspects of employees’ non-work lives has become a topic of great interest. Articles on work and family issues are commonplace and mostly focus on the potential for conflict between these two primary domains of adult life. Work-family conflict (WFC) has been defined as ‘a form of inter-role conflict in which role pressures from the work and family domains are mutually incompatible in some respect’ (Greenhaus and Beutell, 1985, p.77). WFC has been consistently linked to negative outcomes for individuals, families and employing organizations. For example, work interference with family life has been associated with job dissatisfaction, life dissatisfaction, intention to turnover, general well-being, psychological strain, psychiatric disorders, substance abuse and problem drinking(Netemeyer et al., 1996; Frone, 2000; Grzywacz and Marks, 2000; Grant-Vallone and Donaldson, 2001; Boyar et al., 2003; O’Driscoll et al., 2003; Hammer et al., 2004; Mikkelson and Burke, 2004).  Social role theory provides a framework for understanding how WFC affects individual well-being and organizational effectiveness (Dobreva-Martinova et al., 2002). According to social role theory, employees hold various roles within and beyond work. Expectations associated with these roles are communicated by the organizational culture and by role senders (people whose expectations are relevant to the performance of a particular role). Conflict or incongruity between the demands of or behaviours expected in different roles is a form of role stress that can be detrimental to the well-being of employees and the performance of organizations.BurnoutBurnout is one of the most commonly investigated‘outcomes’ of work-life conflict. The most widely*Author for correspondence. E-mail: helenlingard@hotmail.comaccepted	definition	of	burnout conceptualizes	theConstruction Management and EconomicsISSN 0144-6193 print/ISSN 1466-433X online # 2006 Taylor & Francis http://www.tandf.co.uk/journalsDOI: 10.1080/14697010500226913  
phenomenon as ‘a syndrome of emotional exhaustion, cynicism and reduced personal accomplishment’ (Maslach et al., 1996). Of the three dimensions, emotional exhaustion is regarded as being the core dimension of burnout. Research suggests that burnout is associated with negative outcomes for both individuals and organizations. At an individual level, burnout has been associated with health problems, anxiety, depression, reduced self-esteem and substance abuse (Maslach et al., 2001; Schaufeli and Bakker, 2004). Research also consistently links burnout to lower levels of organizational effectiveness, job satisfaction and organizational commitment as well as higher levels of absenteeism and turnover (Wright and Bonett, 1997; Maslach et al., 2001; Schaufeli and Enzmann, 1998). In a recent study of Australian civil engineers, the emotional exhaustion and cynicism dimensions of burnout were strong predictors of engineers’ intentions to quit their jobs (Lingard, 2003).The WFC-burnout relationshipRecent empirical research indicates that WFC is a mediator in the relationship between work-role characteristics, such as workload, schedule demands and perceptions of organizational justice, and burnout (Guerts et al., 2003; Judge and Colquitt, 2004; Lingard and Francis, in press). Indeed, longitudinal studies provide evidence of a ‘loss spiral’ effect, in which WFC precedes employee burnout which, in turn, reduces employees’ ability to cope with work-role demands, giving rise to a greater sense of WFC and ultimately elevated burnout (Demerouti et al., 2004). Intervening to prevent the onset of a ‘loss spiral’ effect is particularly important because, once entered into, loss spirals are likely to be difficult to break.The construction industryToppinen-Tanner et al. (2002) report that white-collar jobs are characterized by high qualitative and quantitative workload, role problems and inter-personal conflicts. Many stressors associated with both WFC and burnout are present in the work of construction professionals and managers. For example, construction employees work long and inflexible hours and bear significant responsibility for project performance in areas such as cost, time, quality and safety. In this context, it is perhaps unsurprising that in one Australian survey, project-based construction employees reported significantly higher levels of WFC and burnout than their counterparts in the same organization’s head office (Lingard and Francis, 2004). Levels of burnout among construction professionals and managers are also reported to be considerably higher than norm scores for other professions in international comparative studies (Francis and Lingard, 2004).Moderators of the stress-strain relationshipConceptually, WFC may be regarded as a form of role stressor and burnout is one relevant stress reaction (or strain). The relationship between WFC and burnout is therefore a type of stressor-strain relationship. The nature of stressor-strain relationships has been widely discussed and studied. Most models of occupational stress purport that certain psychological resources intervene in the stressor-strain relationship to change the strength and/or direction of the relationship. For example, many theories hold that resources have a moderating effect on the stressor-strain relationship. This moderating effect is sometimes referred to as a ‘buffering’ effect, whereby the presence of resources weakens the relationship between the stressor and its strain outcome.Support as a moderatorMany theories of occupational stress hold that the extent to which people enjoy various forms of support will moderate the stress-strain relationship. This effect is depicted in Figure1. For example, the conservation of resources theory (Hobfall and Freedy, 1993) holds that stressful situations make people feel insecure about their ability to obtain or retain resources. This insecurity gives rise to emotional or physical exhaustion. In the absence of social support, the opportunity to benefit from the protective effect of positive social interactions is limited and the stressor-strain relationship is stronger. The demand-control-support (DCS) model of work stress (Johnson and Hall, 1988) also holds that the most adverse health effects occur in jobs that are high in demands, low in control and low in social support. The DCS is an extension of Karasek’s job demands-control model, which held that jobsFigure 1 Contingent effects, support as a moderator of the WFC-burnout relationship (adapted from Cohen et al., 2003, p458)characterized by high demands and low control would evoke the strongest stress reactions (Karasek, 1979). The DCS model argues that job control is not the only resource available for coping with job demands and that social support, from colleagues or supervisors, can reduce the harmful impact of stressful situations at work (Schaufeli and Bakker 2004; Bakker et al., 2004). It has also been postulated that employees’ global beliefs about the extent to which the organization is supportive of them will also moderate the effect of work stress on individual and organizational outcomes (Jones et al., 1995; Dobreva-Martinova et al., 2002; Armstrong-Stassen, 2004).Empirical evidence for the moderating effect of supportThe research evidence concerning the moderating effect of support in the occupational stress-strain relationship is inconsistent. Many of the studies undertaken, indicate that social support, from supervisors, co-workers and others, does indeed act as a protective buffer in the relationship between work stress and burnout (e.g. Russell et al., 1987; Burke and Greenglass 1995; Greenglass et al., 1997; Pines et al., 2002). However, other researchers report no evidence of a moderating effect (e.g. Cheuk and Wong 1995; Konariek and Dudek 1996). In other studies, social support is reported to have a main but not a moderating effect, such that social support has an independent effect on burnout but does not alter the nature of the relationship between work stressors and burnout (Houkes et al., 2001; van Vegche et al., 2004).  The evidence concerning the moderating effects of employees’ global beliefs about the supportiveness of their organization is similarly mixed. Some research provides evidence of a moderating effect (e.g. Jones et al., 1995). Armstrong-Stassen (2004) also reports that employees who perceived their organization to be supportive of them responded less negatively to the stressful process of organizational downsizing. However, Dobreva-Martinova et al. (2002) found no evidence that employees’ perceptions of organizational support moderated the relationship between occupational role stress and individual or organizational well-being.Support in the work-family literatureIn the work-family literature, global perceptions about the extent to which an organization is supportive of employees’ work-life balance have been linked to employees’ willingness to use formal work-family benefits and consequent reductions in WFC(Thompson et al., 1999; Allen, 2001; O’Driscoll et al., 2003). Perceived organizational support is also reported to moderate the relationship between WFC and some dimensions of organizational commitment (Casper et al., 2002). Other studies have confirmed that the presence of social support in the workplace reduces the negative consequences of WFC (Goff et al., 1990; Thomas and Ganster, 1995).  Having a supportive supervisor, in particular, is believed to attenuate the harmful effects of WFC (Thomas and Ganster, 1995; O’Driscoll et al., 2003). Supervisors play a particularly important role because they typically act as gatekeepers in controlling access to alternative work arrangements (Watkins, 1995; Barham et al., 2001). Further, in the absence of formal work-life benefits, supervisors may suggest informal ways to assist employees who experience difficulty in balancing work and family (Batt and Valcour, 2003).  Research also suggests that social relations among co-workers impact upon employees’ experience at the work-family interface. For example, co-workers may be resentful when employees with family responsibilities utilize formal work-life benefits, such as parental leave or flexible work schedules, due to the additional work this imposes upon other members of the work group (Hegtvedt et al., 2002; Blair-Loy and Wharton 2002). Within work groups, social norms can develop concerning the appropriate or inappropriate use of such benefits, and social sanctions apply when people do not conform to group norms (Kirby and Krone 2002). Thus, when co-workers are not supportive of group members’ work-life balance, the effects of WFC are likely to be exacerbated because constraints on the use of family-friendly strategies may be felt.  On the basis of this previous research, we investigated perceived organizational support and social support from supervisors and co-workers as moderators in the relationship between WFC and burnout (emotional exhaustion).Type of supportMost studies of social support and burnout have investigated the impact of support from different sources, e.g. supervisors, co-workers, family or spouse. However, Pines et al. (2002) note that few studies have investigated the effect of different aspects of social support, such as informational, emotional or practical support (See Russell et al., 1987, and Pines et al., 2002, for exceptions). It is possible that the inconsistent results concerning the moderating effect of social support may arise, in part, because different types of support are being measured by researchers. Thus, in this study we focused not only on the sources of social support in the workplace (i.e. supervisors and coworkers) but also on the type of support provided. In particular we focused on the provision of emotional compared to practical support. The former type of support is demonstrated by listening and being sympathetic to employees’ difficulties, whereas the latter type of support involves offering practical assistance to help employees to resolve these difficulties.Research objectivesOwing to the inconsistency of previous research concerning the moderating effect of support in the work stress-strain relationship, no a priori hypotheses were formulated. The objectives of the research were as follows:N To investigate the extent to which global perceptions of the organization’s supportiveness of employees (perceived organizational support) moderate the relationship between WFC and burnout among construction professionals (such as engineers, quantity surveyors and others) and managers;N To investigate the extent to which social support from one’s supervisor moderates the relationship between WFC and burnout among construction professionals and managers;N To investigate the extent to which social support from one’s co-workers moderates the relationship between WFC and burnout among con-struction professionals and managers; andN To investigate the extent to which different types of social support (i.e. emotional and practical support) from one’s co-workers and supervisor moderate the relationship between WFC and burnout among construction professionals and managers.For the purposes of this study the emotional exhaustion dimension of burnout was used to assess the moderating effect of various types of support. Emotional exhaustion is believed to be the core component of burnout and is the component which is most commonly associated with undesirable outcomes for individuals and organizations. Thus our results refer specifically to emotional exhaustion, rather than burnout.Research methodsSurvey administrationThe data were collected from employees of one public and one private sector organization in Queensland, Australia. The public sector organization is involved in the construction of large infrastructure projects and the private sector construction company is involved in both civil engineering and building projects throughout the state of Queensland. All project-based professional or managerial staff of both organizations were invited to participate in the study.  The majority of the data was collected via a World Wide Web-based survey. Paper-based surveys were made available on the website (downloadable pdf version) to allow respondents who were not comfortable completing the survey online to participate in the study. The website contained information about the study as well as privacy information. The web-based delivery of the survey was deemed appropriate for the managerial/professional employees in the sample (Dillman, 2000).  A letter from senior management explaining the purpose of the survey, and assuring confidentiality and anonymity of responses, invited professional and managerial employees to complete the questionnaire. Three weeks after this initial letter, a follow-up e-mail was sent to all potential respondents reminding them to submit their questionnaires, if they wished.MeasurementWFC was measured using a ten-item scale developed by of Netemeyer et al. (1996). Items were scored on a seven-point scale, ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree). Example items are ‘The demands of my work interfere with my home and family life’ and ‘I often have to miss important family activities because of my job’.  Perceived organizational support (POS) was measured using a 16-item version of the scale developed by Eisenberger et al. (1986). Items were scored on a sevenpoint scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree). Example items are ‘Help is available from the organization when I have a problem’ and ‘The organization disregards my best interests when it makes decisions that affect me’ (reverse scored).  Supervisory support was measured using 13 items drawn from two larger scales (Lambert, 2000; Thomas and Ganster, 1995). The scale included statements such as ‘My immediate supervisor is understanding when I have personal or family problems which interfere with my work’ and ‘My immediate supervisor would switch schedules (hours, overtime hours, vacation) to accommodate my family responsibilities’. Items were scored using a five-point scale ranging from 1 (not at all) to 5 (all of the time).  Two scales were used to measure social support from co-workers. Co-workers are defined as the people with whom respondents had the most contact within the company, excluding their immediate supervisor. Faith in peers (Cook et al., 1981) was measured using three items. Responses were scored on a seven-point scale, ranging from 1 (no, I strongly disagree) to 7 (yes, I strongly agree). Example items included ‘If I got into difficulties at work, I know my workmates would try and help me out’ and ‘I can trust the people I work with to lend me a hand if I need it’. Item scores were summed and a high score was indicative of a high level of practical support from co-workers. Three additional items were used to measure peer support. These items were taken from the peer leadership section of a survey of organizations questionnaire developed by Taylor and Bowers (cited in Cook et al., 1981). Items were scored on a five-point scale, ranging from 1 (to a very little extent) to 5 (to a very great extent). Example items were ‘How friendly or easy to approach are the persons in your work group?’ and ‘To what extent are persons in your work group willing to listen to your problems?’ Item scores were summed and a high score was indicative of a high level of emotional support from co-workers.  Emotional exhaustion was measured using the relevant items from the Maslach Burnout Inventory (MBI). Following Maslach et al. (1996), since the response formats of intensity and frequency have been found to be highly correlated, only frequency ratings were used. Items were rated on a seven-point scale ranging from 0 (never) to 6 (every day). Example items are ‘I feel emotionally drained from my work’ and ‘I feel used up at the end of the work day’.Statistical proceduresIn order to test for moderation effects, we used procedures described by Baron and Kenny (1986). First, interaction terms between each of the support variables and WFC were created. Next, hierarchical regression analyses, including the multiplicative interactions, were carried out so that main effects were controlled for in the analysis (Aiken and West, 1991). In step one of each regression, we entered the independent variables (i.e. the relevant support variable and WFC). In step two, we entered the two-way interaction term (the relevant support variable x WFC). If the interaction term was significant, above and beyond the independent variables, a moderating effect was apparent. However, if the interaction term was not significant, no moderation was apparent.  Prior to testing for moderation effects, all continuously measured predictor variables were centred. Centring is a linear transformation method which eliminates problems associated with multi-collinearity. It is achieved by subtracting the mean value for a variable from each score for that variable.  Significant interactions were plotted by calculating regression lines, using procedures described by Cohen et al. (2003). Regression lines were plotted at high (+1 SD), average (SD) and low (21 SD) levels of the moderator variable.  Initially we tested whether emotional exhaustion differed by industry sector, age or gender. No significant differences existed, so we did not include any of these variables in the regression analyses as controls.ResultsSample demographicsTwo hundred and two complete and useable questionnaires were returned. Of the total responses, 63 (31.2%) were from the private sector and 139 (68.8%) were from the public sector. The mean age of the sample was 39.8 years (SD510.7) ranging from 22 to 67 years. The average age of public sector employees was 40.2 years (SD510.8) and private sector employees was 39.0 years (SD510.5). Of the 202 respondents, 178 (88.1%) were male and 24 (11.9%) were female.Perceived organizational support (POS)Table1 shows POS had a significant main effect on emotional exhaustion, i.e. employees who perceive their organization as being supportive of them are less emotionally exhausted. The interaction between WFC and POS also had a significant effect on emotional exhaustion, indicating that POS does moderate the relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion.  Figure2 shows the relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion in conditions of high, medium and low POS. When POS is high, the relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion is relatively weak. However, when the level of POS is low, the slope of the regression line is steeper, representing a stronger positive relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion. Thus, for POS, the moderation hypothesis was supported in our sample.Table 1 Multiple regression for work-to-family conflict and perceived organizational support (POS) as predictors of emotional exhaustion (burnout)Step and predictorsDR2F-change Dfs	b1. Independent variablesWork-to-family conflict(WFC).24732.575	199	.262***Perceived organizational support (POS)2.378***2. InteractionWFC6POS.020	5.515	198 2.147** p5,.05, *** p5,.001.Figure 2	The moderating effect of perceived organizational support (POS) on the relationship between work to family conflictand emotional exhaustion (burnout)Supervisory supportAs the supervisory support items used in the present study were derived from two different scales, a principal components analysis (with varimax rotation) was carried out to determine the modified scale’s factorial structure. One item double loaded on factors 1 and 2, so was removed from the analysis because it could not be reliably interpreted. Table2 shows the factor loadings for the remaining items in the scale. This three-factor solution explained 69.2% of the variance inTable 2	Factor analysis for supervisor support	Factor 1	Factor 2	Factor 3Emotional supportPractical supportCriticismIs concerned about me as a person..838Feels each of us is important as an individual..833Would help me to figure out how to solve a problem..762Is helpful to me when I have a family or personal emergency..740Is helpful to me when I have a routine family or personal matter to attend to..637Is understanding when I have personal or family problems which interfere with my work..625Appears to know a lot about company policies that help employees manage their family responsibilities..623Would switch schedules (hours, overtime hours, vacation) to accommodate my family responsibilities..864Is willing to juggle tasks or duties to accommodate my family responsibilities..837Is critical of my efforts to combine work and family..825Shows resentment of my needs as a working parent..689Would hold my family responsibilities against me..645our sample. These factors were labelled ‘emotional support,’ ‘practical support’ and ‘criticism/resentment’ and had average scores of 3.7 (SD5.833), 3.25 (SD5.996) and 2.28 (SD5.457) respectively. The factor scores are considered separately in the regression analyses. The Cronbach’s alpha coefficients for the three supervisory support factors were .92, .86 and .66 respectively. Thus the internal consistency reliability for the criticism/resentment factor was rather low and, consequently, results associated with this dimension of supervisory support should be treated with caution.  The moderation hypothesis was tested for each of the three dimensions of supervisory support revealed in the factor analysis. The results of the regression analyses are shown in Tables3, 4 and 5.  Table3 reveals that the emotional dimension of supervisory support exhibited a main effect on emotional exhaustion, i.e. employees whose supervisors provide more emotional support are less emotionally exhausted. However, the interaction term was not significant, indicating that the emotional dimension of supervisor support does not moderate the relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion. Thus, for emotional support from one’s supervisor, the moderation hypothesis was not supported in our sample.  Table4 reveals that the practical dimension of supervisory support did not exhibit a main effect on emotional exhaustion. However, the interaction between supervisors’ practical support for employees’ work-family balance and WFC was significant, indicating that practical support from one’s supervisor does moderate the relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion.  
Table 3 Multiple regression for work-to-family conflict and supervisor emotional support as predictors of emotional exhaustionStep and predictorsDR2F-changedfsb1. Independent variablesWork-to-family conflict (WFC).13415.393199.299***Supervisor support – emotional (SS-E)22.419*2. InteractionWFC6SS-E.0081.7991982.093* p5,.05, *** p5,.001.Table 4 Multiple regression for work-to-family conflict and supervisor practical support as predictors of emotional exhaustion1. Independent variablesWork-to-family	.120	13.612	199	.308*** conflict (WFC)Supervisor support –	2.111 practical (SS-P)2. InteractionWFC6SS-P	.073	17.947	198 2.285****** p5,.001.Table 5 Multiple regression for work-to-family conflict and supervisor criticism/resentment as predictors of emotional exhaustionStep and predictorsDR2F-changedfs	b1. Independent variablesWork-to-family conflict(WFC).12414.124199 .312***Supervisor support – criticism and resentment(SS-CR).060*2. InteractionWFC6SS-CR.0429.971198 .201*** p5,.05, ** p5,.01, *** p5,.001.  Figure3 shows the relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion in conditions of high, medium and low supervisory practical support. When the level of practical support received from one’s supervisor is high, the relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion is relatively weak. However, when the level of practical supervisory support is low, the slope of the regression line is steeper, representing a stronger positive relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion. Thus, for practical supervisory support, the moderation hypothesis is supported.  Table5 reveals that supervisors’ criticism or resentment of employees’ family commitments has a significant main effect on emotional exhaustion. Thus, employees whose supervisors are critical/resentful of their family commitments are more emotionally exhausted. The interaction between supervisors’ criticism/resentment and WFC was also significant, indicating that criticism/ resentment from one’s immediate supervisor also moderates the relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion.  Figure4 shows that when supervisors’ criticism/ resentment of employees’ family obligations is low, the relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion is relatively weak. However, when supervisors’ criticism/resentment is high, the slope of the regression line is steeper, representing a stronger positive relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion. Thus, for supervisory criticism/resentment, the moderation hypothesis is supported.Co-worker supportTable6 reveals that emotional support from co-workers was found to have a significant main effect on emotional exhaustion. Employees whose co-workers are supportive are less emotionally exhausted. However, the interaction term was not significant, indicating that co-workers’ emotional support does not moderate the relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion. Thus for emotional support from coworkers, the moderation hypothesis was not supported in our sample.Figure 3 The moderating effect of practical support from one’s supervisor (SS) on the relationship between work to family conflict and emotional exhaustion (burnout)Figure 4 The moderating effect of supervisor criticism/resentment of employees’ family obligations on the relationship between work to family conflict and emotional exhaustion (burnout)Table 6 Multiple regression for work-to-family conflict and co-worker emotional support as predictors of emotional exhaustionStep and predictorsDR2F-changedfsb1. Independent variablesWork-to-family conflict(WFC).12313.976199.333*Co-worker support – emotional (CWS-E)2.121*2. InteractionWFC6CWS-E.0071.5391982.083* p5,.10.  Table7 reveals that practical support from co-workers did not exhibit a significant main effect on emotional exhaustion. However, the interaction between coworkers’ practical support for employees’ work-family balance and WFC was significant, indicating that practical support from one’s co-workers moderates the relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion.  Figure5 shows the relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion in conditions of high, medium and low co-worker practical support. When the level of practical support received from one’s co-workers is high, the relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion is relatively weak. However, when the levelTable 7 Multiple regression for work-to-family conflict and co-worker practical support as predictors of emotional exhaustionStep and predictorsDR2F-changedfsb1. Independent variablesWork-to-family conflict(WFC).11613.025199.327**Co-worker support – practical (CWS-P)2.0852. InteractionWFC6CWS-P.04711.1321982.238******* p5,.001.of practical co-worker support is low, the slope of the regression line is steeper, representing a stronger positive relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion. Thus, for practical co-worker support, the moderation hypothesis is supported in our sample.DiscussionThe results of the study highlight the importance of creating a supportive work environment for the prevention of employee burnout in the construction industry.  The extent to which employees perceive that the organization is supportive of them has a main effect on emotional exhaustion (the core dimension of burnout). Perceived organizational support also changes the nature of the relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion, such that high POS acts as a protective buffer against emotional exhaustion.  The results also show that social support from one’s co-workers and supervisor is also very important in the prevention of burnout. However, the results indicate that the role of social support differs according to the type of support experienced. Interestingly, emotional support from both co-workers and supervisors showed an independent main effect on employees’ emotional exhaustion, such that employees who enjoy emotional support are less emotionally exhausted. However, neither emotional support from co-workers nor from supervisors altered the nature of the relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion. In contrast, practical support from co-workers and supervisors exhibited no independent main effects on emotional exhaustion, but practical support from both co-workers and supervisors did moderate the relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion. Thus, when employees experience practical support from either their coworkers and/or their supervisors, the relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion is significantly weaker than when practical support is lacking.Figure 5 The moderating effect of co-worker practical support on the relationship between work to family conflict and emotional exhaustion (burnout)  Our results contradict those of other researchers which show that emotional support has a stronger moderating effect in the stressor-strain relationship than other types of social support. One reason for this might be the context in which the study took place, because Pines et al. (2002) suggest that the effect of social support may be subject to cultural differences. It is noteworthy that many of the studies that report a moderating effect of emotional support were undertaken in the human service professions, including health-care workers, teachers and social workers. Our results indicate that, in the culture of the construction industry, emotional support from co-workers and supervisors does not have a moderating effect in the relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion. However, practical support from both co-workers and supervisors does have a moderating effect. The implication of this finding is that merely listening and being sympathetic to subordinates’ and co-workers’ work-family balance difficulties is insufficient. In order to protect employees who experience WFC against burnout, it will be necessary to provide assistance of a practical nature.  Despite the absence of a moderating effect, the provision of emotional support does have a main effect upon emotional exhaustion. As such, emotional support is also important in the prevention of employee burnout and empathy and listening skills should be encouraged. However, caution must be exercised because previous research shows that emotional support can take different forms, depending upon the content of the conversations between support givers and receivers. In some cases, emotional support can actually exacerbate employees’ feelings of hopelessness and increase burnout (Zellars and Perrewe´, 2001). A more fine-grained analysis of the role of different types of emotional support is therefore recommended.  The results suggest that supervisors’ criticism or resentment of subordinates’ family responsibilities is likely to have a particularly harmful effect upon burnout among employees. Not only was supervisory criticism/ resentment directly related to employees’ emotional exhaustion, but criticism/resentment also moderated the relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion. Thus, where supervisors are critical/resentful of employees’ family obligations the relationship between WFC and emotional exhaustion is significantly stronger than where such criticism/resentment is not apparent. The importance of this dimension of supervisory support suggests that supervisors should be targeted for sensitivity training. This training should focus on organizational policy and procedures for work-life balance and explain to supervisors the importance of accommodating employees’ family obligations and, in what circumstances, practical support should be given.  Previous research has also revealed that social support moderates the effectiveness of other intervention strategies designed to reduce or prevent employee burnout. For example, Van Dierendonck et al. (1998) report that interventions designed to reduce burnout have a more immediate and stronger effect when social support is high. Similarly, Janssen et al. (2001) report that social support moderates the extent to which job control acts as a buffer in the relationship between job demands and burnout. Thus, employees are more likely to exercise control over their work arrangements when they perceive that social support is available. These results suggest that the provision of social resources and a supportive work environment should be part of any intervention designed to alleviate or prevent employee burnout. Our results confirm the importance of a supportive work environment but future research should also examine the extent to which different types of support influence employees’ adoption of coping strategies or take-up of organizationally available worklife balance benefits.ConclusionsOur results suggest that interventions designed to alleviate or prevent employee burnout in the construction industry should focus, at least in part, on the creation of a supportive work environment. Such interventions should focus on directly reducing emotional exhaustion by enhancing employees’ perceptions that the organization is supportive of them and fostering a caring workforce that is willing and able to provide appropriate emotional support to co-workers and subordinates. Burnout mitigation interventions should also include strategies to increase the amount of practical support provided by co-workers and supervisors to employees with work-life balance difficulties. Assistance of a practical nature appears to have a moderating effect, decreasing the extent to which employees who experience WFC suffer from emotional exhaustion.Limitations and future researchThe research was limited in one important respect. The survey was cross-sectional. As such, it is impossible to determine the direction of causal relationships. It is possible, for example, that the direction of causal relationships is actually the reverse. For example, emotional exhaustion could precede WFC, rather than the other way around. It is important that this study be followed up by a longitudinal study in order to clarify the direction of causal relationships. This longitudinal study should also test for the ‘loss spiral’ effect discussed by Demerouti et al. (2004). Should loss spirals be found to occur in the construction industry, the role of a support in breaking these spirals should be explored.AcknowledgementThe authors would like to thank the Construction Industry Institute (Australia) for generously funding this research.ReferencesAiken, L.S. and West, S.G. (1991) Multiple Regression: Testing and Interpreting Interactions, Sage, Newbury Park, CA.Allen, T.D. (2001) Family-supportive work environments: The role of organizational perceptions. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 58, 414–35.Armstrong-Strassen, M. (2004) The influence of prior commitment on the reactions of layoff survivors to organizational downsizing. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 9, 46–60.Bakker, A.B., Demerouti, E. and Verbeke, W. (2004) Using the job demands-resources model to predict burnout and performance. Human Resource Management, 43, 83–104.Barham, L.J., Gottlieb, B.H. and Kelloway, E.K. (2001) Variables affecting managers’ willingness to grant alternative work arrangements. Journal of Social Psychology, 138, 291–302.Baruch-Feldman, C., Brondolo, E. and Ben-Dayan, E. (2002) Sources of social support and burnout, job satisfaction, and productivity. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 7, 84–93.Baron, R.M. and Kenny, D.A. (1986) The moderatormediator variable distinction in social psychological research: conceptual, strategic and statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1173–82.Batt, R. and Valcour, P.M. (2003) Human resources practices and predictors of work-family outcomes and employee turnover. Industrial Relations, 42, 189–220.Blair-Loy, M. and Wharton, A.S. (2002) Employees’ use of work-family policies and the workplace social context. Social Forces, 80, 813–45.Boyar, S.L., Maertz, C.P. jr., Pearson, A.W. and Keough, S. (2003) Work-family conflict: a model of linkages between work and family domain variables and turnover intentions. Journal of Managerial Issues, 15, 175–90.Burke, R.J. and Greenglass, E. (1995) A longitudinal examination of the Cherniss model of psychological burnout. Social Science and Medicine, 40, 1357–63.Burke, R.J. and Greenglass, E. (1996) Work stress, social support, psychological burnout and emotional and physical well-being among teachers. Psychology, Health and Medicine, 1, 193–205.Casper, W.J., Martin, J.A., Buffardi, L.C. and Erdwins, C.J. (2002) Work-family conflict, perceived organizational support and organizational commitment among employed mothers. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 7, 99–108.Cheuk, W.H. and Wong, K.S. (1995) Stress, social support and teacher burnout in Macau. Current Psychology:Developmental, Learning, Personality, Social, 14, 42–6.Cohen, J., Cohen, P., West, S.G. and Aiken, L.S. (2003) Applied Multiple Regression/correlation Analysis for the Behavioural Sciences, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ.Cook, J.D., Hepworth, S.J., Wall, T.D. and Warr, P.B. (1981) The Experience of Work: A Compendium and Review of 249 Measures and Their Use, Academic Press, London.Demerouti, E., Bakker, A.B. and Bulters, A.J. (2004) The loss spiral of work pressure, work-home interference and exhaustion: reciprocal relations in a three-wave study. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 64, 131–49. Dillman, D. (2000) Mail and Internet Surveys: The Total Design Method, 2nd edn, Wiley, New York.Dobreva-Martinova, T., Villeneuve, M., Strickland, L. and Matheson, K. (2002) Occupational role stress in the Canadian forces: its association with individual and organizational well-being. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 34, 111–121.Eisenberger, R., Huntington, R., Hutchison, S. and Sowa, D. (1986) Perceived organizational support. Journal of Applied Psychology, 71, 500–7.Francis, V. and Lingard, H. (2004) A Quantitative Study of Work-life Experiences in the Public and Private Sectors of the Australian Construction Industry, Construction Industry Institute of Australia, Brisbane.Frone, M.R. (2000) Work-family conflict and employee psychiatric disorders: the national comorbidity survey. Journal of Applied Psychology, 85, 888–95.Goff, S.J., Mount, M.K. and Jamison, R.L. (1990) Employer supported child care, work/family conflict and absenteeism: a field study. Personnel Psychology, 43, 793–809.Grant-Vallone, E.J. and Donaldson, S.I. (2001) Consequences of work-family conflict on employee wellbeing over time. Work & Stress, 15, 214–26.Greenglass, E.R., Burke, R.J. and Konarski, R. (1997) The impact of social support on the development of burnout in teachers: examination of a model. Work and Stress, 11, 267–268.Greenhaus, J.H. and Beutell, N.J. (1985) Sources and conflict between work and family roles. Academy of Management Review, 10, 76–88.Grzywacz, J.G. and Marks, N.F. (2000) Family, work, workfamily spillover and problem-drinking during midlife. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 62, 336–48.Guerts, S.A.E., Kompier, M.A.J., Roxburgh, S. and Houtman, I.L.D. (2003) Does work-home interference mediate the relationship between workload and wellbeing? Journal of Vocational Behavior, 63, 532–59.Hammer, L.B., Allen, E. and Grigsby, T.D. (1997) Workfamily conflict in dual earner couples: within individual and crossover effects of work and family. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 50, 185–203.Hammer, T.H., Saksvik, P.Ø., Nytrø, K., Torvatn, H. and Bayazit, M. (2004) Expanding the psychosocial work environment: workplace norms and work-family conflict as correlates of stress and health. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 9, 83–97.Hegtvedt, K.A., Clay-Warner, J. and Ferrigno, E.D. (2002) Reactions to injustice: factors affecting workers’ resentment toward family-friendly policies. Social Psychology Quarterly, 65, 386–400.Hobfall, S.E. and Freedy, J. (1993) Conservation of resources: a general stress theory applied to burnout, in Schaufeli, W.B., Maslach, C. and Marek, T. (eds) Professional Burnout: Recent Developments in Theory and Research, Taylor and Francis, Washington DC, pp. 115–31.Houkes, I., Janssen, P.P.M., de Jonge, J. and Nijhuis, F.J.N. (2001) Specific relationships between work characteristics and intrinsic work motivation, burnout and turnover intention: a multi-sample analysis. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 10, 1–23.Janssen, P.P.M., Bakker, A.B. and de Jong, A. (2001) A test and refinement of the demand-control-support model in the construction industry. International Journal of Stress Management, 8, 315–32.Johnson, J.V. and Hall, E.M. (1988) Job strain, work place social support and cardiovascular disease: a cross sectional study of a random sample of the Swedish working population. American Journal of Public Health, 78, 1336–42. Jones, B., Flynn, D. and Kelloway, K. (1995) Perception of support from the organization in relation to work stress, satisfaction and commitment, in Sauter, S. and Murphy, L. (eds) Organizational Risk Factors for Job Stress, APA, Washington DC, pp. 41–52.Judge, T.A. and Colquitt, J.A. (2004) Organizational justice and stress: the mediating role of work–family conflict. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89, 395–404.Karasek, R.A. jr. (1979) Job demands, decision latitude and mental strain: implications for job design. Administrative Science Quarterly, 24, 285–308.Kirby, E.L. and Krone, K.J. (2002) ‘The policy exists but you can’t really use it’: communication and the structuration of work-family policies. Journal of Applied Communication Research, 30, 50–77.Konariek, J. and Dudek, R.D. (1996) Social support as a buffer in the stress-burnout relationship. International Journal of Stress Management, 3, 99–106.Lambert, S.J. (2000) Added benefits: the links between worklife benefits and organizational citizenship behavior. Academy of Management Journal, 43, 801–15.Lingard, H. (2003) The impact of individual and job characteristics on ‘burnout’ among civil engineers in Australia and implications for employee turnover. Construction Management and Economics, 21, 69–80.Lingard, H. and Francis, V. (2004) The work-life experiences of office and site-based employees in the Australian construction industry. Construction Management and Economics, 22, 991–1002.Lingard, H. and Francis, V. (in press) Does work-family conflict mediate the relationship between job schedule demands and burnout in male construction professionals and managers? Construction Management and Economics.Maslach, C., Jackson, S.E. and Leiter, M.P. (1996) Maslach Burnout Inventory Manual, 3rd edn, ConsultingPsychologists Press, Palo Alto, CA.Maslach, C., Schaufeli, W.B. and Leiter, M.P. (2001) Job burnout. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 397–422. Mikkelson, A. and Burke, R.J. (2004) Work-family concerns of Norwegian police officers: antecedents and consequences. International Journal of Stress Management, 11, 429–44.Netemeyer, R.G., Boles, J.S. and McMurrian, R. (1996) Development and validation of work-family conflict and family-work conflict scales. Journal of Applied Psychology, 81, 400–10.O’Driscoll, M.P., Poelmans, S., Kalliath, T., Allen, T.D., Cooper, C.L. and Sanchez, J.L. (2003) Family-responsive interventions, perceived organizational and supervisor support, work-family conflict and psychological strain. International Journal of Stress Management, 10, 326–44.Peeters, M.C.W. and Le Blanc, P.M. (2001) Towards a match between job demands and sources of social support: a study among oncology care providers. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 10, 53–72.Pines, A.M., Ben-Ari, A., Utasi, A. and Larson, D. (2002) A cross-cultural investigation of social support and burnout. European Psychologist, 7, 256–64.Posig, M. and Kickul, J. (2003) Extending our understanding of burnout: test of an integrated model in nonservice occupations. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 8, 3–19.Russell, S.W., Altmaier, E. and Van Velzen, D. (1987) Jobrelated stress, social support and burnout among classroom teachers. Journal of Applied Psychology, 72, 269–274.Schaufeli, W.B. and Bakker, A.B. (2004) Job demands, job resources, and their relationship with burnout and engagement: a multi-sample study. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 25, 293–315.Schaufeli, W. and Enzman, D. (1998) The Burnout Companion to Study and Practice: A Critical Analysis, Taylor & Francis, London.Thomas, L.T. and Ganster, D.C. (1995) Impact of familysupportive work variables on work-family conflict and strain: a control perspective. Journal of Applied Psychology, 80, 6–15.Thompson, C.A., Beauvais, L.L. and Lyness, K.S. (1999) When work-family benefits are not enough: the influence of work-family culture on benefit utilization, organizational attachment and work-family conflict. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 54, 392–415.Toppinen-Tanner, S., Kalimo, R. and Mutanen, P. (2002) The process of burnout in white-collar and blue-collar jobs: eight year prospective study of exhaustion. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 23, 555–70.Van Dierendonck, D., Schaufeli, W.B. and Buunk, B.E. (1998) The evaluation of an individual burnout intervention program: the role of inequity and social support. Journal of Applied Psychology, 83, 392–407.Van Vegche, N., de Jonge, J., Soderfeldt, M., Dormann, C. and Schaufeli, W. (2004) Quantitative versus emotional demands among Swedish human service employees: moderating effects of job control and social support. International Journal of Stress Management, 11, 21–40.Watkins, K.E. (1995) Changing managers’ defensive reasoning about work/family conflicts. Journal of Management Development, 14, 77–88.Wright, T.A. and Bonnett, D.G. (1997) The contribution of burnout to work performance. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 18, 491–9.Zellars, K.L. and Perrewe´, P.L. (2001) Affective personality and the content of emotional social support: coping in organizations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 459–67.      186	Lingard and Francis  Burnout among construction professionals	187    