Innovation management model: a tool for sustained implementation of product innovation into construction projectsMartina E. Murphy, Srinath Perera & George HeaneyTo cite this article: Martina E. Murphy, Srinath Perera & George Heaney (2015) Innovation management model: a tool for sustained implementation of product innovation into construction projects, Construction Management and Economics, 33:3, 209-232, DOI:10.1080/01446193.2015.1031684To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/01446193.2015.1031684Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rcme20
Construction Management and Economics, 2015Vol. 33, No. 3, 209–232, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01446193.2015.1031684Innovation management model: a tool for sustained implementation of product innovation into construction projectsMARTINA E. MURPHY1*, SRINATH PERERA2 and GEORGE HEANEY11School of the Built Environment, Ulster University, Newtownabbey, Northern Ireland, BT37 0QB2Faculty of Engineering and Environment, Northumbria University, Ellison Place, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 8ST UKReceived 6 June 2014; accepted 13 March 2015Technological advancement and demand for economic growth are driving product innovation in the construction industry. However there is concern that the industry lacks the mechanisms to effectively implement new products. Recent studies have developed a method for identifying and evaluating the risks which impact on new technology adoption and two constructs were generated for improving implementation rates. The aim is to investigate whether the constructs can be integrated to develop a practical tool for use by project stakeholders desirous to generate innovation. Process modelling, statistical analysis and failure mode and effect analysis are used to align the constructs into a test model (TM). Three rounds of Delphi gain a consensus on the TM outputs and the results produce the innovation management model (IMM). The IMM is a simple process flowchart which establishes the prioritized sequence of stakeholder activities required to implement a new technology at key stages in the project process. The IMM has implications for selection of procurement methods and will instil confidence in stakeholders to adopt new technologies. Additionally it provides a risk-based approach for stakeholder competency mapping and for sustaining product innovation in construction projects.Keywords: Failure mode and effect analysis, innovation constraints, product innovation, process management, stakeholder competency
IntroductionInnovation is an idea developed and commercially implemented into an institution, industry, business or project (Freeman, 1989; Rogers, 1995). In a dynamic economy the introduction of innovation has been recognized as being central to increased growth and productivity, as well as having social and competitive benefits (Sproull and Goodman, 1990; Schmidt, 1995; Seaden, 1996). Studies on innovation have been undertaken widely in various industries such as the car industry (Abernathy and Clark, 1985; Womack et al., 1990), business and management (Drucker, 1986), computer technology (Tushman and Anderson, 1986), photolithography and digital industries (Henderson and Clark, 1990; Rothwell, 1992), retail (Riddle, 2000).*Author for correspondence. E-mail: m.murphy@ulster.ac.uk© 2015 Taylor & Francis   Innovation in the construction industry also brings considerable benefits (Dodgson, 2000; Gann, 2000; Van der Panne et al., 2003; Manley et al., 2005; Aouad et al., 2010; Yu et al., 2012). However, unlike other industrial sectors construction has historically failed to generate and sustain economic growth through innovation. This is despite the industry having characteristics seen asfavourabletoinnovation(Tatum,1986). Forthis reason there has been a significant drive by government to encourage uptake of new technologies across public sector projects in an effort togenerate the available benefits (Latham, 1994; Egan, 1998). This has created an industry in which clients are demanding more complex buildings with advanced levels of integrated technology which are not feasible with current construction technologies (Winch, 1998; Gann, 2000; Steele and Murray, 2004; Cooper et al., 2005). Designers seek to incorporate new products into designs to satisfy client expectations but are nervous about the implications for the project as well as their business (Emmitt, 2001).   Buildings comprise components and systems which interact with each other. Introducing a new technology into a building will have reverberations throughout other systems which may often be difficult to identify and thus manage (Slaughter, 1998). The design and construction phases of a project have historically followed a sequential and separated relationship (Cooper et al., 2005). By being isolated from each other the design and construction activities of a project play only a limited part in the other’s phase. Studies contend that these divisions give rise to long project times, poor quality control and slow piecemeal innovation (Gann, 2000; Moore and Dainty, 2001; Lloyd-walker et al., 2014). Kwakye (1997, p. 53) speaks of a ‘lack of cross-fertilization of ideas’ between construction projects in which processes can be wasteful and ultimately fail to pass on the benefits of innovation, from one project to the next (Kwakye, 1997).   Therefore new technologies incorporated into construction projects have a high propensity for failure and literature identifies many lost opportunities where technologies were introduced but poorly managed, thus not fully implemented to generate innovation (Rosenberg, 1982; King and Majchrzak, 1996; Dodgson, 2000; Van der Panne et al., 2003; Glass et al., 2008). For this reason construction innovation researchers contend that product innovation needs to be managed effectively within the construction project to mitigate this potential for failure. However, innovation, by virtue of its definition, is an iterative process and cannot be confined within the constraints of a sequential project process and herein lies the problem for the growth of innovation in the construction industry. In order to increase levels of innovation in the industry the process of innovation needs to be captured and delivered alongside the project management process in spite of the complexities and challenges this presents.   The study is a development from previous work (Murphy et al., 2013) which produced two theoretical constructs to facilitate the successful implementation of new technology into a building. The aim is to determine whether and how these constructs can be aligned to produce a model which can be used by stakeholders in the construction industry. Thus a method to align these two constructs is proposed to produce an innovation management model which can be used by industry stakeholders to adopt and implement new technology into construction projects.LiteratureIt was primarily economists who undertook early studies on innovation such as Schumpeter (1930s–40s) and Schmookler (1950s). Schumpeter described innovation as a historic and irreversible change in the way of doing things, the development of something new which renders previous solutions redundant (Schumpeter, 1947). The broad range of innovation definitions put forward since the 1930s all proposed the notion of something ‘new’, the implementation of which makes irrevocable changes to its environment (Urabe, 1988). Rothwell’s definition of innovation was widely adopted by early investigators of innovation in construction as, ‘the first use of an idea by a new unit of adoption’ (Rothwell, 1976). The concept of first use was echoed in many early construction innovation studies (Laborde and Sanvido, 1994; Harkola and Greve, 1995;Slaughter, 2000). However continuous first use within an industry would invariably render the innovation (if it could still be termed so) defunct. In this study it is proposed that the first use of a new technology is defined as the first implementation of a new technology into a construction project.Definition of innovationThe Oslo Manual classified innovation as being either technical (product innovation) or organizational (process innovation) (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2005). Process innovation is the introduction of advanced management techniques (Abernathy and Utterback, 1978; Anderson and Manseau, 1999). Rosenberg (1982, p. 4) defined product innovation as one which ‘results in a qualitatively superior product from a given amount of resources’. Product innovations advance standard practice and challenge the status quo of traditional methods which many construction stakeholders consider the norm (Nam and Tatum, 1989). Product innovation in construction is defined as a new design, technology, material or component that has economic, functional, or technological value to the context in which it is adopted (Nam and Tatum, 1989). Slaughter (2000, p. 2) defined a construction innovation as ‘the actual use of a nontrivial change and improvement in a process, product or system that is novel to the institution developing the change’. A significant omission in this definition is the concept of associated risk which is a key attribute of innovation (Winch, 1998; Dodgson, 2000). More recently Ling (2003, p. 635) addressed the concept of risk in her definition of construction innovation as, ‘a new idea that is implemented into a construction project with the intention of deriving additional benefits, although there might have been associated risks and uncertainties’. Buildings comprise systems which interact with each other as well as the environment. Therefore, introducing an innovation into such a context can have reverberations throughout the other systems which may often be difficult to trace (Slaughter, 1998). Similarly, because every project is unique it is difficult to apply an innovation which is specific to one building across to another. All this produces a significant degree of risk which can be difficult to anticipate (Pries and Janszen, 1995; Winch, 1998; Dodgson, 2000). Risk and liabilities are synonymous in the construction industry and it is because of the concern about potential liabilities that many clients and professionals insist on using proven technology (Emmitt, 2001).Drivers for construction innovationDrivers for innovation in construction include the demand-pull of user requirements which stretch the boundaries of these standard solutions such as the regulatory environment (Pries and Janszen, 1995); fiscal policy (Porter, 1980); environmental policy (Tatum, 1989; Toole, 1998; Winch, 1998; Salter and Gann, 2003); competition policy (Newton, 1999; Steele and Murray, 2004; Tatum, 1988, 1989) and trade and education policies (Dulaimi et al., 2002). Additionally the introduction of new technologies puts pressure on the industry to generate innovation (Nam and Tatum, 1997; Mitropoulos and Tatum, 1999; Gann and Salter, 2000). This technology-push can come from contractors, suppliers and manufacturers within the construction industry (Von Hippel, 1988; Slaughter, 1998) but more commonly involves the adoption of new technologies from other industries (Pries and Janszen, 1995). Kamien and Schwartz (1975) proposed that innovation in construction derives from a perceived demand (demand-pull) which then influences the direction and rate of technological development (technology-push). It is this model which most closely defines the typical driving mechanism operating within the construction industry (Gann, 2000).Innovation managementThe management of innovation has been defined as the management of new ideas into good currency (Van der Ven, 1986), the idea being invention, the currency being innovation. To consider how innovation is to be managed it is necessary to understand how it is implemented (Caerteling et al., 2006). Implementation is the journey of the innovation from inception, through manufacture, installation, commissioning and finally to evidence of clear business benefits (Voss, 1988). Currently the accepted means of implementing an innovation into construction projects relies largely on standard project management techniques (Bresnen and Marshall, 2001; Hartmann et al., 2012). Project management relies largely on planning and control techniques to deliver the project essentials of time, cost and quality. However it has been identified that an over-reliance on strict project controls and evaluation methods around which project management operates often stifles innovation (Koskela and Vrijhoef, 2001).   Government reports in the 1990s (Latham, 1994; Egan, 1998) called for the adoption of process management techniques to deliver innovation, rather than traditional project management techniques. It was reasoned that since the construction industry is concerned with the design and development of a building product it should look to manufacturing for reference on how to manage the process (Dulaimi and Kumaraswamy, 2000; Cooper et al., 2005). In a process-driven model the innovation is progressed based on the right conditions being delivered in a sequential fashion. This is at variance with a project-driven approach where the critical paths and rigid milestones dictate a locked system, with little or no flexibility for an innovation to be accommodated.   A new management approach must also possess a degree of flexibility to allow reiterations in the project process to facilitate new technology adoption and implementation (Dulaimi and Kumaraswamy, 2000; Keegan and Turner, 2002; Cooper et al., 2005). Lampel (2001) argued that such flexibility further depends on the acquisition and development of core competencies amongst the stakeholders to support the innovation process (Edum-Fotwe and McCaffer, 2000; Dainty et al., 2005). This is a significant development of the process management approach. Rather than merely adoption of a process management approach, in which the right conditions are required at the right time in a sequential fashion, it is proposed that a stakeholder competency-based approach is required in which successful delivery is incumbent on the right stakeholder competencies being in place at the appropriate stage of the management process. This study seeks to investigate whether those two approaches can be aligned to produce an integrated management method for use by industry professionals in the implementation of an innovation into a construction project.Modelling construction innovationThe problem with existing implementation models in construction is that they often fail to be translated from theoretical constructs into a workable solution for the industry. Tatum developed a classification system to enable industry professionals to analyse and improve a construction technology, such as an exterior wall installation or alignment of mechanical equipment (Tatum, 1988). The components of the classification system included (1) material and equipment resources, (2) construction-applied resources, (3) construction processes and (4) project requirements and constraints. The first three components dealt with the technical independencies of a technology whilst the fourth component sought to address the issue of project constraints on a technology. However the constraints focused largely on issues of project objectives, regulatory requirements and external factors but did not seek to address the impact of stakeholder competency to manage a technology. Additionally, and more pertinently, whilst the study provided a systematic approach to analysing the implementation of a technology it did not purport to investigate innovative or untested technologies and the risks associated with these.   Slaughter (1998) reviewed the literature from a wide range of non-construction industries to produce five models of construction innovation. Based upon current management and economic theories of innovation the models were differentiated by their degree of change from current practice, and their links to other components and systems. The five models are incremental, modular, architectural, system, and radical innovations. As a categorization tool Slaughter’s model facilitates companies in planning their implementation activities; however, similar to Tatum’s classification system, it did not purport to influence and direct management activity during the project process. However, a later study proposed that the implementation of construction innovations could be managed through a cycle of stages and activities (Slaughter, 2000). The cycle of stages was (1) identification, (2) evaluation, (3) commitment, (4) detailed preparation, (5) actual use and (6) post-use evaluation. It was proposed that the stages could differ slightly when applied to specific innovations and depending on the type of innovation. The five types of innovation (incremental, architectural, modular, system and radical) would be matched to a company’s existing resources and competencies and an overall strategy for the firm to implement the innovation could be developed. Whilst the study presented a multidimensional model for innovation implementation it was specific to the activities of organizations within the construction industry that influence the supply and installation of construction innovations such as manufacturers and suppliers. It did not seek to address implementation within a specific project comprising diverse stakeholders and the challenges of implementation such as fixed timescale and budget constraints.   Wix and Katranuschkov (2002) proposed that process models provide potentially valuable tools for industrial use by developing effective, easy-to-use collaborative working methods which can be adopted by project stakeholders. ‘Conceptual information modelling’ is a term used to describe the capturing of project data within building construction and has been used to advance the importance of process models for communicating new ideas and procedures within the construction industry. Conceptual information modelling, as a precursor to process modelling, has significant insights for the development of a communication tool for use in the construction industry. More recently Davenport (2013) suggested that once a process model has been developed for generating product innovation a project will naturally develop ongoing improvements in its own established processes. This confirms early insights into innovation modelling which identified that product innovations often lead to process improvements. However, process improvements are required to produce product innovation. Furthermore, it is often the resulting process which sustains the initial product innovation (Utterback and Abernathy, 1975).   In light of the rationale above a process model is considered the most appropriate method for introducing a new management tool for sustaining innovation. Murphy developed a method for evaluating innovation constraints associated with the failure of new technology adoption (Murphy et al., 2011, 2013). The study identified that failure of stakeholder competencies was the primary cause of constraints and in most cases precipitated the abandonment of the technology adoption. The study produced two constructs which established the management activities and the competencies required to successfully adopt and implement a new technology to generate product innovation. However, like previous construction innovation research, the two constructs were largely theoretical. Whilst both constructs held important information about successful implementation of a new technology they did not constitute a workable tool for industry use. Therefore this study aims to develop a practical tool for the industry incorporating these two constructs. It adopts a process modelling approach to propose an innovation management model that can be used to effectively communicate the critical activities to project stakeholders.Research methodA review of the literature identified a series of preliminary hypotheses, notably: the imperative for an investigation into the sustainable adoption and implementation of new technologies into buildings within construction projects; the requirement for an appropriate mechanism to manage the implementation process to successful commissioning thus fulfilling the definition of a product innovation; and, lastly, the identification of stakeholder competencies as a potential driver for a mechanism.   The study adopted two constructs from work by Murphy which established the management activities and competencies required to successfully adopt and implement new technology into construction projects (Murphy et al., 2013) namely:(1) Innovation management flowchart (IMF): a flowchart of the systematic management activities required to implement an innovation against the stages of the project process.(2) Constraint classification matrix (CCM): a matrix which establishes the stakeholder competencies required to mitigate the ongoing constraints acting on the new technology in order to successfully deliver an innovation.Whilst both constructs hold important information required to generate innovation it is not possible from evaluating one construct alone to determine whether they address the study hypotheses. That is, the IMF alone did not identify the criticality of the management activities that was required for the success of an innovation. Similarity, the CCM on its own did not identify the management activities which could mitigate the competency risk. Therefore as separate constructs their value for practical application into the industry is limited. It is therefore proposed to determine whether the constructs could be aligned into an integrated practical tool for generating innovation in an industrial context. A method using process modelling and statistical analysis was established to align the constructs. It comprised identification and extraction of the data from each construct. Statistical analysis was used to evaluate the potential for alignment of the two datasets and validated using expert assessment. A process template was developed which established a framework into which the validated data from the two constructs could be populated. The output of the integrated process was a test model.   The test model (TM) provided an early framework of a working model which could be used by industry stakeholders to adopt and implement a new technology. Its format was sequential, reflecting the project stages, and incorporated the key project stakeholders which are key attributes for an industrial-based tool. Additionally, the activities from the model could be extracted to facilitate the development of programming software to integrate the activity requirements of the innovation with the project management programme. The programme would then be used as part of risk management workshops to inform ongoing management of the project.   To seek a consensus of opinion of the model outputs the Delphi technique was adopted. Three rounds of Delphi-based surveys with 18 experts were utilized to gain a consensus on the TM and its further refinement. The result of the Delphi process was an innovation management model (IMM). The IMM established a systematic sequence of activities required to manage the effective implementation of a new technology into a construction project, using core stakeholder competencies, to sustain a product innovation. Prior to evaluating alignment methods it was necessary to understand how the individual theoretical constructs were generated in the existing literature.Innovation management flowchart (IMF)The IMF is a flowchart of the systematic management activities required to implement an innovation against the stages of the project process. From the literature a set of project stages were generated which aligned the traditional project process with the process of innovation. Whilst previous studies have been carried out to link procurement systems with successful innovation, there had been scant work done to map the procurement process with the innovation process (Caerteling et al., 2006). A concept model which mapped traditional project stages with the process of innovation was aligned using two established areas of literature: (1) the Generic Design and Construction Process Protocol (Hughes, 1991; Cooper et al., 1998, 2005); and (2) two models of innovation literature (Marquis, 1968; Slaughter, 2000) (Figure 1 and Table 1).   Case study data from 30 technologies adopted and implemented into construction projects was collected using interviews and project documentation. Criteria were based on a multilayered set of requirements, the primary being a new technology product sourced from within the construction industry which has been successfully adopted, implemented and commissioned into a new building in the UK within the last five years. Examples of such products included: Okalux, an innovative light-diffusing glazing system with insulatory properties and Xanadome, a lightweight enclosure system for use in disaster management situations. Interviews were carried out with 96 project stakeholders including clients, project managers from construction firms, designers and product suppliers. The objective was to identify evidence of stakeholder activity used to adopt and implement the technologies mapped against the concept model. This provided a chronological sequence of recorded events about the ‘journey’ of the technology from adoption to working integration into the completed building.   The resultant data was populated into a flowchart template in which the x-axis of the template represented the project stakeholders implicit in the implementation of an innovation and the y-axis of the template represented the generic project stages.
Figure 1	Concept modelThe points at which the x-axis and y-axis intersected Project stakeholders were populated with the stakeholder response activitiesProject stakeholders are the principal players in therequired to manage the ongoing constraints on the adoption and implementation of a technologytechnology.Table 1	Concept modelGeneric procurement stagesStage DescriptionDefinitionI	Intention to innovateInitial feasibility study is carried out to assess options for delivery. A strategy will be put in place determined by the cultural buy-in to seeking out an innovative solution for the projectII	Formulation of design conceptInnovation is identified and defined, in response to the brief. Technical feasibility is assessed and a number of potential design solutions are proposed. Major design elements are identified and worked up to produce an agreed concept building designIII	Resolution of detailed designSecure commitment for the innovation amongst stakeholders. Resources are committed to the design and intensive feasibility research is undertaken. (At this stage it is common for the innovation to be terminated or deferred.)IV	Preparation of productioninformationEnsure the innovation is fully worked up, detailed and communicated to all potential stakeholders, in preparedness for construction. Commitment is secured through allocation of resources as well as the production of project documentation (drawings, specifications, etc.)V	Preparation for implementationEnsure engagement of the innovation to all relevant stakeholders, prior to commencement of the works. Preparation and development of the innovation may involve production of a prototypeVI	Implementation of the innovationInstall the innovation through onsite coordination, integration and feedback by all stakeholders. Whilst design uncertainties may have been reduced the risk of failure is greater at this stage. Adjustments and changes may be made on site to derive the most benefit from the innovation’s implementationVII	Post-implementation evaluation(completed project)Handover of the completed building incorporating the innovation. The milestone initiates post-project review procedures to inform future work and exploit opportunities for the possible reuse of the innovation. Post-use evaluation will involve obtaining information about the innovation’s implementation. This may be diffused to other teams, construction projects or design firms
(Manseau and Shields, 2005). They are also the project participants whose competency can adversely impact on the implementation process (Anderson and Manseau, 1999; Moore and Dainty, 2001; Dubois and Gadde, 2002; Miozzo and Dewick, 2002; Blayse and Manley, 2004). Adverse impact by stakeholders on the implementation of a new technology is usually largely non-intentional. In many cases the role of the stakeholder may form part of a series of passive events but their impact is often the key trigger that causes a constraint to occur (Miozzo and Dewick, 2002). The project stakeholders identified as implicit in the adoption and implementation of a technology are:• Clients: the customers or receivers of services,financially responsible (but not otherwise liable) for the implementation of the innovation.• Project managers: the persons with overall responsibility for planning and execution of the project, with team coordination responsibilities.• Designers/Consultants: those whose intention it isto adopt the innovation, the creators and coordinators of the research required to oversee technical integration and communication of the innovation.• Suppliers/Subcontractors: those who deliver the innovation, oversee the supply and installation, as well as the commissioning of the new technology. They mayormaynotbetheinventorsofthenewtechnology.For the purposes of this study the definition of ‘innovation’ is met when the new technology is fully functional in its context and producing the benefits anticipated. The supplier is a subcontractor and will require the services of the main contractor to implement the new product; however, the main contractor is not liable in the case of failed implementation.Stakeholder competencyAny characteristic required for performing a given task successfully can be considered a competence (Wadalkar and Pimplikar, 2012). Stakeholder competencies are the combination of knowledge, skills and behaviours that contribute to personal effectiveness in a project (Edum-Fotwe and McCaffer, 2000; Lampel, 2001; Perera et al., 2013). Each stakeholder is tasked with a role within which they must display the appropriate competencies to perform the job. Product innovations require operational competency such as communication, technical knowledge and personnel management (Egbu, 1999; Edum-Fotwe and McCaffer, 2000; Gann and Salter, 2000; Lampel, 2001; Dainty et al., 2005; Gu and London, 2010). Organizational innovation requires strategic competency such as value, strategy and culture (Prahalad and Hamel, 1990; Javidan, 1998; Egbu, 1999; Edum-Fotwe and McCaffer, 2000; Gu and London, 2010; Lloyd-walker et al., 2014).   It has been argued that innovation requires a great deal of flexibility within projects and that the effective management of such flexibility depends on the acquisition and development of competency in the personnel (Lampel, 2001). In the dynamic capabilities framework, Teece established the assumption that core competencies should be used to modify short-term competitive positions but can be used to build longerterm competitive advantage (Teece et al., 1997). The right competency exhibited by key project stakeholders will support the core processes within the immediate project whilst establishing more effective competencies within the firms from which the stakeholders operate (Edum-Fotwe and McCaffer, 2000; Nahod et al., 2013a, 2013b; Murphy, 2014).   In this study a stakeholder competency framework was established from the existing literature to develop the matrix. The McBer competency dictionary and codebook (Spencer and Spencer, 1993) provides a convenient scoring system against which behavioural responses can be awarded a numerical value depending upon the level of competency emerging from the behavioural event interviews. The stakeholder competency framework in this study was developed based on the established McBer competency assessment model (McClelland, 1973; Dainty et al., 2005) in the following stages:(1) Identification from case studies of the evidence of competency failure.(2) Identification of the project stakeholders implicit in the competency failure.(3) Data collection through interviews.(4) Identification of management response activities used to mitigate the competency failure.The management response activity data collected was used to develop a systematic sequence of activities. The sequence established the optimum process for implementing an innovation using the appropriate stakeholder competence. The findings were subject to validation and refinement using a panel of industry experts to produce a list of critical competencies required for the implementation of an innovation. The procedure is described below.   The initial stage was to identify poor stakeholder competency in projects seeking to implement an innovation. Using interviews and assessment of project documentation, 131 innovation constraints were extracted from 30 construction projects (Murphy et al., 2011). Extraction of the constraints also involved identification of the competency failure which brought about the constraint and the project stakeholder implicit.   Project stakeholders are the key participants whose competence can adversely impact on the implementation of a construction innovation (Anderson and Manseau, 1999; Dubois and Gadde, 2002; Miozzo and Dewick, 2002; Blayse and Manley, 2004). Adverse impact is usually largely non-intentional. In many cases the role of the stakeholder may form part of a series of passive events but their impact is often the key trigger that causes a constraint to occur (Miozzo and Dewick, 2004). The project stakeholders identified as implicit in the management of an innovation are client, project manager, designer and supplier (Murphy et al., 2011).   Each stakeholder was asked to describe a range of critical situations they had encountered in the project, what events led up to them (cause), who was involved (stakeholders), what did they consider the outcome might be if the situation continued unaddressed (effect). Furthermore the stakeholders were asked what they did to address the situation in order to mitigate the impending failure (management response activity). The interviews were transcribed and coded in accordance with the McBer Competency Dictionary and resultant data was subject to failure mode and effect analysis (FMEA). FMEA is a design risk assessment tool used to evaluate the criticality of potential risks. The extracted constraint data was subject to FMEA which identified the different risk rankings of the innovation constraints. The findings were subject to validation and refinement using expert consensus. It was found that eightkeycompetencieswere criticallyused by stakeholders to manage innovation. They comprised six operational competencies (Egbu, 1999; Edum-Fotwe and McCaffer, 2000; Gann and Salter, 2000; Lampel, 2001; Dainty et al., 2005; Gu and London, 2010) and two strategic competencies (Prahalad and Hamel, 1990; Javidan, 1998; Egbu, 1999; Edum-Fotwe and McCaffer, 2000; Gu and London, 2010; Lloyd-walker et al., 2014) (see Table 2).Constraint classification matrix (CCM)Rosenberg (1982) proposed that since most innovations turn outas failuresmore attentionneeds to be paid tothe evaluation of innovation constraints. Constraints can produce a blockage in the overall project processTable 2	Stakeholder competency frameworkOperational competencyDescriptionInformation and communicationConcerned with ensuring timely and appropriate generation, collection, dissemination, storage and ultimate disposal of information (explicit or tacit) as well as communicating effectively, listening sensitively and adapting communication to foster effective communication with other stakeholders.Personnel management (human resources)Technical knowledgeInvolves the abilities required to make the most effective use of the people involved in the project to facilitate the successful implementation of the innovation.Involves the abilities required to make effective analysis of technical problems arising from the integration of the innovation.Planning and administrationInvolves the abilities to identify relevant tasks to implement the innovation; how they can be done, allocating resources and monitoring progress.Cost managementInvolves the abilities required to ensure that the innovation is implemented within the approved budget; includes resource planning, cost estimating, cost budgeting and cost control.Programme managementInvolves the abilities required to achieve timely completion of the project and successful integration of the innovation; includes activity definition, sequencing, duration estimating, schedule development and schedule control.Organizational competencyDescriptionStrategy and policyConcerned with understanding the overall mission and values of the organization/client, adopting the innovation and ensuring stakeholder actions are aligned.Culture and valuesInvolves the abilities to identify and propagate shared beliefs, values, and norms throughout the adopting organization/project.and premature rejection of an innovation (Koskela and Vrijhoef, 2001; Hartmann, 2006). Constraints which act upon the project process are well documented in literature but those which act on an innovation are less well investigated (Eaton et al., 2006; Blismas and Wakefield, 2009). Studies have identified that prioritization of constraints is critical to any study on construction innovation particularly where there were numerous stakeholders involved within the project process (Eaton et al., 2006; Sebastian, 2011; Wagner et al., 2011). In the Murphy study the CCM is a matrix whichestablishesthestakeholdercompetenciesrequired to mitigate the ongoing risk of constraints acting on a new technology in order to successfully deliver an innovation (Murphy et al., 2011).   A matrix is more often associated with concepts of linear algebra and mathematical theory. It is a tri-variable communication tool in which there are X and Y variables and where the two variables intersect there is a third variable, i.e. Z. This third variable is more often an empirical value which quantifies the relationship between the intersecting X and Y variables. In this study a matrix was formulated in which the x-axis represents the stakeholders and the project stages at which they were active and the y-axis represents the competencies of those stakeholders implicit in the implementation of the innovation. The Z variable in the matrix represents the constraint and associated risk value acting on the product and encountered by that stakeholder at that stage. To graphically represent the intersecting data the constraint risk values were displayed in the form of a bubble marker. The size of the bubble marker was scaled proportionately to the constraint risk: low constraint risk; medium constraint risk; high constraint risk; severe constraint risk. The resultant CCM is a collective series of bubble graphs (Figure 2).Test model formulationThe two theoretical constructs separately provided important information; however, it was not possible from evaluating one construct alone to determine whether they addressed the study hypotheses, i.e. a mechanism to facilitate the sustained adoption and implementation of a new technology into a building to generate product innovation. Therefore it was proposed to determine whether the constructs could be aligned. The first stage was to confirm the compatibility of the two sets of source data.Significance analysisIt was assumed that the source populations of the IMF and the CCM had normal distributions and equal variances; however, evidence of this significance was required before the two sets of data could be aligned. If the data did not evidence reasonable statisticalFigure 2	Constraint classification matrix (CCM)significance the data outputs could not be combined and would need to be analysed separately.   A t-test was undertaken to compare the means of the two samples of data (Kinnear and Gray, 2004). The samples were dependent and paired in that the two constructs were matched by the particular variable, i.e. the risk priority number (RPN) of the constraints common to each dataset. The objective was to assess whether the difference between the sample averages was significant. Since the critical region of the sample was distributed symmetrically, it was intended to undertake a two-tailed test of the data. To check for anomalies in the data before running the t-test a scatter plot was constructed. The scatter plot indicated a clear positive relationship between the two sets of data when the two means were considered and provided a degree of confidence to proceed with the t-test. In preparing to test for significance it was necessary to define the size of the effect expected. Using findings from published literature the test was measured against a categorization of the effect sizes based on work by Cohen (1988).   The t-test was calculated by dividing the difference betweenthesamplemeansbyanestimateofthestandard deviation of the distribution of differences. Since the sample variances have similar values it was intended to work with a pooled estimate of the supposedly constant population variance.The results of thefirststage showed that the value of t (on 30 degrees of freedom) was 3.953, and that the p-value, sig. (two-tailed), was 0.0004. The result of the t-test was significant beyond the 5% level. The 95% confidence interval on the difference between the means was (15.16, 47.55), which excludes zero, the value under the null hypothesis. To obtain the effect size (Cohen,1988)estimates ofthese population valueswere used, i.e. 31.35 for the difference between means and 44.161 for the standard deviation of the difference scores.FromtheCohen’s Tablethisindicated amedium effect. This evidenced that there was statistical significance between the two groups. However, since the result of the Cohen’s test was ‘medium’, a Pearson correlation test was carried out and the results confirmed a correlation with the significance test.   The first output tabulated the means and standard deviation of the two variables. The second output tabulated the Pearson correlation with its p-value. With a value of 0.234 and a two-tailed p-value of 0.204, it could be concluded that the correlation coefficient was significant beyond the 1% level thus representing a ‘medium’ effect. Since the results of both groups were found to be significantly similar, it was therefore considered appropriate to align the two sets of data.   A process template was constructed to populate the data from the two theoretical constructs. The x-axis of the template represented the project stakeholders implicit in the implementation of an innovation. The y-axis of the template represented the generic process stages. The points at which the x-axis and y-axis intersected were populated with the management response activities required to manage the innovation constraint. However the risk criticality of each management activity was not evident from the process flowchart. For this reason the data was subject to FMEA.Failure mode and effect analysis (FMEA)FMEA is a charting technique for design risk assessment and originated in aeronautical and mechanical engineering before being applied in the construction industry (Andrey et al., 1998; Nielsen, 2002). It is considered an appropriate tool for this study in that it allows for subjective assessment of data to produce empirical values for statistical analysis. FMEA evaluates the criticality of potential causes and effects of product failure in a process or system. By identifying the risk of a constraint acting on the new technology the project manager can adapt the management strategy to facilitate the implementation of the new technology. An FMEA is calculated by multiplying the occurrence (O), severity (S) and detection values (D) of a potential risk occurring to the new technology. The values for O, S and D are produced through tacit assessment and judgement by stakeholders. The resultant value, the RPN, enables actions to be prioritized according to their potential risk.   FMEA produced risk rankings for each of the constraints identified in the CCM. The higher the RPN the more urgent was the action required. The lower the RPN less urgent but still necessary action was required. The results were fed back to the participating stakeholders for verification and the following data was tabulated:(1) Innovation constraint(2) Implicit project stakeholder(3) Competency failure(4) Process stage at which the constraint occurred(5) Process stage at which the constraint impacted (had an effect) on the project(6) Risk of occurrence of the constraint (O)(7) Risk of severity of effect of the constraint (S)(8) Probability of non-detection of the constraint (D)(9) Risk priority number (RPN) of the constraint(10) Management response activity to the constraint   A Schedule of Construct Data (SoCD) was developed of the above data. See Appendix 1. From the data the least constraint RPN value obtainable was ‘1’, and the highest was ‘1000’ (i.e. 10 10 10 = 1000). Hence, a resultant risk prioritization scale would be, ‘1’ (least constraint risk) to ‘1000’ (highest constraint risk) and could be subdivided (see Figure 3).   This enabled the resultant management response activities to be ranked in terms of the criticality in the process. The process template was populated with the data to produce a test model. The test model provided an early framework of what a practical model to manage innovation might look like. Its format was sequential and logical which are key attributes for an industrial-based tool (see Figure 4 parts A and B).   To develop and validate the test model a Delphi technique was utilized to secure a statistically significant consensus on the weighting of the risk rankings for each management activity from experts in the field. A statistically significant consensus on the risk rankings of the management activities was investigated to refine and validate the test model.Expert evaluationThe Delphi technique is used in complex sectors in which a consensus is to be reached such as theory and design application (Corotis et al., 1981). The Delphi method is a highly formalized method of communication that is designed to extract the maximum amount of unbiased information from a panel of experts. The iterations of the Delphi exercise enabled the experts to modify their risk rankings and project them beyond their own opinions.   The Delphi study comprised three rounds of questionnaire responses. In the first round respondents were required to rate the activities of the TM, in terms of
	1	250	500	750	1000	Low risk Constraint	Medium risk ConstraintFigure 3	Constructing a scale of constraint criticality #1Designers SuppliersProject ManagerClientProject StakeholdersFigure 4a	Test model (part A)their contribution towards a successful innovation, mean group score from Round 1, and invited to reconusing a Likert scale format. In Round 2 respondents sider their responses. In the third round of the survey were provided with their previous response as well as the consensus results over the previous two rounds
Figure 4b	Test model (part B)were issued for final consideration. A concordance analysis was used to measure the consistency of the experts’ responses over successive rounds of the Delphi exercise. Typically, Delphi results have been measured by calculating the inter-quartile range and median of derived data (Shields et al., 1987).Selection of expertsA contentious aspect of the Delphi method is that of the individual expertise of the panel members (Dalkey et al., 1970). The success of the Delphi method depends principally on the careful selection of the panel of experts (Chan et al., 2001; Yeung et al., 2007). An ‘expert’ by definition is someone having comprehensive or authoritative knowledge or skill sets in a specific area; however, it was healthcare researchers that identified the lack of literature available to debate the practicalities of defining ‘experts’ for use within Delphi panel research (Baker et al., 2006). Delbecq et al. (1975) provided guidelines on how to solicit qualified participants for a group technique study. The work was further developed by Okoli and Pawlowski (2004) into a multiple-step iterative approach called the knowledge resource nomination worksheet (KRNW). The purpose of the KRNW is to enable categorization of the experts before identifying them. The approach contends that one specific participant panel could not exhibit all the necessary expertise required to do the survey. Therefore it was critical to develop a number of skills groups which would ensure that all potential areas of expertise were covered in the main survey. This ensures that no specific competence or skills group is overlooked (Okoli and Pawlowski, 2004).   For this study three skills groups of participants were used: (1) practitioners; (2) academics; (3) policymakers. Even within these homogeneous groups it was identified that there were subsets which have diverse competencies. It was therefore required to identify these subsets and include a further range of sub-criteria within each panel group such as professional accreditation and peer-reviewed publications.   Three primary criteria were devised in order to identify eligible participants for this study, namely:Criterion 1: Having extensive working experience in the implementation of new technology to generate product innovation.Criterion 2: Having current/recent and direct involvement in the implementation of new technology to generate product innovation.Criterion 3: Having a sound knowledge and understanding of innovation concepts and their application within construction projects.   In order to obtain the most valuable opinions, only practitioners/academics who met all the selection criteria were considered. A total of 18 experts were identified and invited to participate in the study. The panel represented a wide distribution of professional and academic participants: 10 were industry practitioners; eight were academics of which four were recognized leading experts in the field of innovation management. The names of all selected participants were listed and tabulated with the individual’s relevant discipline, skills, qualifications and affiliated company or institution. A list of the panel members and their positions in the corresponding companies and organizations is given in Table 3 although the names of participants and their organizations are abbreviated to respect their anonymity.Self-rating indexIn selection of the panel participants it was recognized that the degree of expertise of the participants could affect the reliability of the results. A means to address the impact of variations in expert opinion was through the use of a self-rating mechanism (Dalkey et al., 1970). The self-rating mechanism is a means of inviting the participants to rate their own expertise, or competence, in the area under discussion. Self-rating usually takes the form of a Likert-style index where expertise is scaled from 1 to 5 indicating scope of expertise as determined by core criteria from the literature (Dalkey et al., 1970). The use of the five-point Likert scale for self-rating is consistent with work by Shields et al. (1987). It was considered importantthat the self-rating score was made after the respondent’s response to the question to ensure focus on the questions rather than the respondent’s competency. Additionally a pilot survey was carried out with an independent panel of three experts (one academic and two practitioners) to secure their feedback to the protocol being employed. On the basis of the pilot survey outcomes a number of refinements were made to the procedures to inform the ongoing research, namely that the assessment of risk be more pointedly addressed in the questions of the follow-up Delphi rounds and the requirement for evidence of the expertise of participants from the self-rating questions to be evaluated against core literature-based criteria.Delphi Round 1Round 1 survey questions related to the activities established in the TM. Respondents were asked to evaluate the importance of the TM activities in terms of achieving successful implementation of an innovation. Respondents were asked to indicate a choice based on a five-point Likert scale from 1 to 5 (1 = not important, 5 = extremely important). The questions were listed to reflect their sequence in the TM, i.e. (1) procurement stage at which the activity should occur; (2) stakeholder implicit in the activity; (3) the description of the activity (see Figure 5).   In Round 1, 18 experts were targeted of which 16 responded. The results were analysed by applying the mean as the consensus method. Research has identified that an inter-quartile range of one unit on a five-point scale is representative of a suitable level of consensus. In analysing the 16 validated responses it was necessary to evaluate both the answer to the question as well as the self-rating value. The question response value was multiplied with the self-rating value. This constituted ‘weighted’ data as opposed to ‘unweighted data’ which in the question response value was used. In the light of the debate on the significance of self-rating tools, it was decided to calculate the mean values of weighted as against unweighted data. It could then be critically assessed whether there was any statistical significance between the two sets of data and the impact the two
Table 3	List of the panel of experts for the Delphi methodNo.Key groupsNamePositionMember of aprofessional body/instituteAn academicauthority; reviewer in the topic areaRecognized position in the construction industry123Industry practitioners with experience in managing innovationMs CMr NMr S1PrincipalPrincipal PartnerPrincipal PartnerXXX–––––X4Mr S2DirectorX–5Mr TChairmanX–X6Mr McCPrincipal PartnerX––7Mr M1DirectorX––8Mr M2PartnerX–X9Mr LDirectorX––1011Academics with expertise in project managementDr GMr JSenior LecturerDirector ofEducationXXX–X12Dr OLecturerXX–131415Recognized experts in innovation and innovation managementDr HDr MMr RAssociate ProfessorProject ManagerManaging DirectorXXXX X–– –X16Dr FManaging DirectorX–XPROJECT STAGE I – Intention to innovate1.   In evaluating the role of the Client at STAGE I, how do you rate the following activities, in terms of ensuring a successful innovation:(a) Establishment of a single-point Client representative (CL/1-In)1 2 3 4 5(b) Early cost analysis of innovation within Client's business strategy (CL/1-Ct)1 2 3 4 5(c) Active Client/End User involvement into early investigations of the innovation (CL/1-Cl)1 2 3 4 5	Self-rating Index:	1	2	3	4	5(Please circle as appropriate)Figure 5	Extract from Delphi questionnaire (Round 1)mean sets have on the TM data. The unweighted value was the respondent’s score to each question whilst the weighted value was the multiplied value of the question score by the self-rating index (SRI). Hence: Question score SRI = weighted value (1–25). A scale was established for both weighted and unweighted data (see Table 4).   Analysis of the weighted and unweighted results in Round 1 suggested that the inclusion of the SRI values (weighted results) produced a moderating effect on the respondent’s scores. A t-test was carried out on the means of the weighted and unweighted data. The results showed that the two sets of data were extremelystatistically significant which confirmed that the SRI was not effectively skewing the results. The impact of the SRI confirmed much of the current debated on effectiveness of self-rating tools. It indicated that if a comprehensive and rigorous protocol is followed unweighted scores should be sufficient to ensure accurate results of the survey.   Using the unweighted data results Table 5 shows the comparison of total frequencies of risk categories between the TM and Round 1 results. It evidenced that ‘high’ risk categories increased by 14 whilst ‘severe’ risk categories increased by 6. ‘Medium’ and ‘low’ risk categories both decreased by 10 from the TM results.
Table 4	Weighted and unweighted scales correlated to riskcategoriesUnweighted survey scaleTM risk categoriesWeight scaleed survey0	to1.25Low risk0to6.251.25	to2.5Medium risk6.25to12.52.5	to3.75High risk12.5to18.753.75	to5Severe risk18.75to25There were no ‘low’ risk frequencies evidenced in the Round 1 results (see Table 5).   Table 5 also showed the comparison of stakeholder competency rankings between the TM and Round 1. Round 1 analysis evidenced a change in the third highest ranking stakeholder competency from the TM thus the critical three stakeholder competencies after Round 1 were (1) technical knowledge; (2) information and communication; (3) organizational culture. Organizational culture had displaced cost management as the more critical competency to manage an innovation.Delphi Round 2In Round 2 respondents were asked to evaluate the importance of the TM activities in terms of risk to successful implementation of an innovation: (1) low risk; (2) medium risk; (3) high risk; (4) severe risk. Respondents were provided with their previous score from Round 1 as well as the mean group score and invited to reconsider their previous score, or otherwise, in the light of this information.   Round 2 evidenced a significant shift towards the lower quartile scores compared to Round 1, with the majority of results centred on the ‘medium’ risk to ‘high’ risk categories. Total frequency of ‘high’ risk, ‘medium’ risk and ‘low’ risk categories increased by 3, 8 and 3 respectively, whereas there were no ‘severe’ risk scores evidenced. It could be construed that the participants were reverting to a ‘pack’ mentality and readjusting their responses to the middle ground (Linstone and Turoff, 1975).   Significantly Round 2 analysis evidenced another change in the third highest ranked stakeholder competency to programme management. Therefore the critical three stakeholder competencies after Round 2 were (1) technical knowledge; (2) information and communication; (3) programme management. Programme management had displaced organizational culture as the more critical competency. It was clear that by the end of Round 2 the two most critical stakeholder competencies were still technical knowledge and information and communication.Delphi Round 3In Round 3 respondents were provided with the consolidated results from Round 2 and again invited to reconsider their previous scores. The results of Round 3 evidenced a conclusive swing back to the broad range of results which had been evidenced in Round 1 (see Table 6). There was an even distribution of risk rankings across all the risk categories as opposed to the convergence at ‘high’ risk for over 54% of the activities in Round 2. Also the critical five stakeholder competencies were identical in Round 3 to Round 2, i.e. (1) technical knowledge; (2) information and communication; (3) programme management; (4) organizational culture; and (5) cost management.Delphi resultsRecent literature has advanced the approach that innovation should be delivered through a process-based stakeholder competency approach rather than traditional project management approaches (Edum-Fotwe and McCaffer, 2000; Lampel, 2001; Dainty et al., 2005; Murphy et al., 2013). The Delphi survey established the critical stakeholder competencies required for successful delivery of a product innovation are: (1) technical knowledge; (2) information and communication; (3) programme management. Technical knowledge is concerned with the level of understanding of the new technology and the competency to apply that understanding within a management context. Historically technical complexities and limitations in technology adoption have focused on investigations of collaborative working (Kiviniemi et al., 2008) and failed to maintain insights into technical knowledge competence. However there is strong evidence of recent studies addressing technical knowledge competence to implement new technologies (Lee et al., 2006; Steel et al., 2012; Ibrahim and Moselhi, 2013; Migilinskas et al., 2013). Programme management is concerned with the integration of the implementation process with the project management process. Much of the recent research into programme management competence has focused on documenting the impact of new technologies using benchmarking tools such as key performance indicators to assess the impact on site-based technology implementation such as building information modelling (BIM) (Azhar et al., 2008; El Asmar and Francom, 2013). This study suggests that the early appointment of an innovation champion (Stage I) is critical for documenting and monitoring the implementation of a new technology. However it was found that this is only effective where there is a competent project manager in place and would suggest that strong project management skills are required to support the

work of an innovation champion. Information and communication relates to the level of interaction evidenced amongst project stakeholders during the adoption and implementation stage. It is well documented that issues of stakeholder collaboration and integration are crucial to the long-term success of new technology (Kiviniemi et al., 2008; Zuppa et al., 2009; Sacks et al., 2010; Dossick and Neff, 2011; Ho and Feng, 2013). The Delphi findings in this study also suggest that inconsistent communication transfer, particularly at the early development stages (Stage III), is a key factor in technology failure. Effective information control and communication transfer exhibited by stakeholders early in the process drove successful implementation of the technology in the latter stages of the project (Stage VI).ConclusionsProduct innovation in the construction industry brings considerable benefits to all construction stakeholders. However unlike other sectors construction has historically failed to generate and sustain innovation to harness thesebenefits.Therearewell-establishedreasonsforthis not least the historic separation of the design and construction stages of the development process. Consequently new technology adopted during the design stagesstruggles tosurvivethrough theconstruction stage to fulfil implementation. It requires effectively managing the project process to mitigate this potential for failure. However, innovation, by virtue of its definition, is an iterative process which cannot be confined within the rigid constraints of a sequential project management process. Recent studies have argued that innovation requires a great deal of flexibility within projects and that the effective management of such flexibility depends on the acquisition and development of competency in the stakeholders (Dulaimi and Kumaraswamy, 2000; Edum-Fotwe and McCaffer, 2000; Lampel, 2001; Keegan and Turner, 2002; Cooper et al., 2005; Dainty et al., 2005; Murphy et al., 2011; Perera et al., 2013). Therefore a process management approach, delivered in conjunction with the project management process, was proposed as the means through which to deliver innovation. Whilst there have been influential studies to develop the research around innovation management the outputs have been largely theoretical and there is a gap in the development of a practical tool for facilitating successful implementation of innovation into construction projects.   This study is a development on previous work which produced two theoretical constructs for the successful implementation of a new technology into a building: the innovation management flowchart (IMF) and the constraint classification matrix (CCM). Whilst both constructs held important information required to sustain innovation their value for practical application into the industry was limited. Therefore it was proposed to determine whether the two constructs (IMF and CCM) could be integrated into a practical tool for generating innovation in an industrial context. A method using process modelling and statistical analysis was established to integrate the constructs. The approach comprised extraction of the data from each construct using statistical analysis and failure model and effect analysis (FMEA). A process template was developed which established a framework into which the extracted data from the two constructs was populated. The output of the alignment process was a test model. The test model was subject to three rounds of Delphi using 18 experts to gain a consensus on the test model outputs. The result of the Delphi process was an innovation management model (IMM).   The primary outcome of this study is the development, testing and validation of a model to mitigate the risk of abandonment of new technology implementation due to the operation of uncontrolled constraints. The IMM establishes a systematic sequence of prioritized activities required to manage the effective implementation of a new technology into a construction project, using core stakeholder competencies, to generate product innovation. The IMM, as a process model, can be used repeatedly across numerous construction projects to implement a new technology.   Previous studies have shown that process models provide potentially valuable tools for industrial use by developing effective, easy-to-use collaborative working methods which can be adopted by project stakeholders (Wix and Katranuschkov, 2002). The IMM is a simple, flowchart format which reflects the requirement of an industry that has historically resisted overcomplicated modelling arrangements to convey simple, effective precepts. Practically, the activities from the IMM can be extracted to facilitate the development of programming software to integrate the activity requirements of the innovation with the project programme. The programme can then be used as part of risk management workshops to inform the ongoing management of the project.   The IMM has implications for the selection of procurement methods. The key sources of innovation in the construction industry have commonly been identified as contractors, suppliers and manufacturers (Von Hippel, 1988; Slaughter, 1998). The IMM used in conjunction with integrated procurement methods can increase control of the implementation process thus reducing the inherent risk of premature failure of the innovation. It allows the main contractor or the project manager to implement the IMM tool to manage risks related to the implementation of the technology. Furthermore it will encourage increased levels of product development from within the industry thus reducing the high levels of technology transfer from other sectors.   The IMM will instil confidence in clients and designers in sourcing and adopting new, untested technologies in the knowledge that a new product can be successfully implemented into a building and its benefits realized. The IMM tool provides a stakeholder specific view to the process of managing innovation within the design and construction stages of a project. Each stakeholder can use the tool to guide their input towards sustaining the innovation. This has implications for competency mapping of personnel within projects as well as participating firms. It will inform targeted skills training and continuing professional development (CPD) of key stakeholders to develop and advance their competencies to manage new technology implementation. This, in turn, has the potential to reverse the tide of poor innovation rates in the construction industry and thus improve economic growth. Since the construction industry currently lacks the mechanisms to effectively adopt and implement innovation the IMM provides insights as to how a competency-based approach may address this knowledge gap and provide a practical tool for increasing the rate of successful innovation uptake in the construction industry.Disclosure statementNo potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.ReferencesAbernathy, W.J. and Clark, K. (1985) Mapping the winds of change. Research Policy, 14, 3–22.Abernathy, W.J. and Utterback, J.M. (1978) Patterns of innovation in technology. Technology Review, 80(7), 40–7.Anderson, F. and Manseau, A. (1999) A systemic approach to generation/transmission/use of innovation in construction activities. Innovation: Management Policy and Practice, 2(5–6), 43.Andrey, P., Carvalho, A. and Helman, H. (1998) Looking for what could be wrong: an approach to lean thinking. Proceedings from the Sixth Annual Conference of the International Group for Lean Construction, Guaruja, Brazil, 13–15 August.Aouad, G., Ozorhon, B. and Abbott, C. (2010) Facilitating innovation in construction: directions and implications for research and policy. Construction Innovation: Information, Process, Management, 10(4), 374–94.Azhar, S., Hein, M. and Sketo, B. (2008) Building information modelling (BIM) benefits, risks and challenges, in Proceedings of the 44th ASC National Conference, Auburn, Alabama, USA.Baker, J., Lovell, K. and Harris, N. (2006) How expert are the experts? An exploration of the concept of ‘expert’within Delphi panel techniques. Nurse Researcher, 14(1), 59–70.Blayse, A.M. and Manley, K. (2004) Key influences on construction innovation. Construction Innovation, 4(3), 143–54.Blismas, N. and Wakefield, R. (2009) Drivers, constraints and the future of offsite manufacture in Australia. Construction Innovation: Information, Process, Management, 9(1), 72–83.Bresnen, M. and Marshall, N. (2001) Understanding the diffusion and application of new management ideas in construction. Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 8(5–6), 335–45.Caerteling, J.S., Hartmann, A. and Tijhuis, W. (2006) Innovation processes in construction: two case studies. Joint Conference on Construction Culture, Innovation and Management, Dubai, United Arab Emirates.Chan, A., Yung, E., Lam, P., Tam, C. and Cheung, S. (2001) Application of Delphi method in selection of procurement systems for construction projects. Construction Management and Economics, 19, 699–718.Cohen, J. (1988) Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences, 2nd edn, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, NewJersey.Cooper, R., Kagioglou, M., Aouad, G., Hinks, J., Sexton, M. and Sheath, D. (1998) The development of a generic design and construction process, in European Conference, Product Data Technology (PDT) Days, March 1998, pp. 1–10.Cooper, R., Aouad, G., Lee, A., Wu, S., Fleming, A. and Kagioglou, M. (2005) Process management in design and construction, Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford.Corotis, R.B., Harris, J.C. and Fox, R.R. (1981) Delphi methods: theory and design load application. Journal of the Structural Division, 107(6), 1095–105.Dainty, A.R., Bryman, A., Price, A.D., Greasley, K., Soetanto, R. and King, N. (2005) Project affinity: the role of emotional attachment in construction projects. Construction Management and Economics, 23(3), 241–4.Dalkey, N., Brown, B. and Cochran, S. (1970) The Delphi method III: use of self-ratings to improve group estimates. Technological Forecasting, 1, 283–91.Davenport, T.H. (2013) Process innovation: reengineering work through information technology, Harvard Business Press, Boston, MA.Delbecq, A.L., Van de Ven, A.H. and Gustafson, D.H. (1975) Group techniques for program planning: a guide to nominal group and Delphi processes, Scott, Foresman, Glenview, IL.Dewick, P. and Miozzo, M. (2004) Networks and innovation: sustainable technologies in Scottish social housing. R&D Management, 34(3), 323–33.Dodgson, M. (2000) The management of technological innovation: an international and strategic approach, Oxford University Press, Oxford.Dossick, C.S. and Neff, G. (2011) Messy talk and clean technology: communication, problem-solving and collaboration using building information modelling. The Engineering Project Organization Journal, 1(2), 83–93.Drucker, P.F. (1986) Innovation and Entrepreneurship, Pan, London.Dubois, A. and Gadde, L.E. (2002) The construction industry as a loosely coupled system: implications for productivity and innovation. Construction Management & Economics, 20(7), 621–31.Dulaimi, M. and Kumaraswamy, M.M. (2000) Procuring for innovation: the integrating role of innovation in construction procurement, in Proceedings of ARCOM 2000 Conference, Glasgow, pp. 303–12.Dulaimi, M.F., Ling, F., Ofori, G. and De Silva, N. (2002) Enhancing integration and innovation in construction. Building Research and Information, 30(4), 237–47.Eaton, D., Akbiyikli, R. and Dickinson, M. (2006) An evaluation of the stimulants and impediments to innovation within PFI/PPP projects. Construction Innovation: Information, Process, Management, 6(2), 63–7.Edum-Fotwe, F.T. and McCaffer, R. (2000) Developing project management competency: perspectives from the construction industry. International Journal of Project Management, 18, 111–24.Egan, J. (1998) Rethinking Construction. Report from the Construction Task Force.Egbu, C.O. (1999) Skills, knowledge and competencies for managing construction refurbishment works. Construction Management & Economics, 17(1), 29–43.El Asmar M. and Francom T. (2013) Assessing the impact of Building Information Modelling (BIM) on construction project performance, in Hajdu, M. and Skibniewski, M. (eds.) Procs Creative Construction Conference, 6–9 July 2013, Budapest, Hungary, pp. 101–10.Emmitt, S. (2001) Technological gatekeepers: the management of trade literature by design offices. Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 8(1), 2–8. Freeman, C. (1989) The Economics of Industrial Innovation, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.Gann, D.M. (2000) Building Innovation: Complex Constructs in a Changing World, Thomas Telford, London.Gann, D.M. and Salter, A.J. (2000) Innovation in projectbased, service-enhanced firms: the construction of complex products and systems. Research Policy, 29(7–8), 955–72.Glass, J., Dainty, A.R. and Gibb, A.G. (2008) New build: materials, techniques, skills and innovation. Energy Policy, 36(12), 4534–8.Gu, N. and London, K. (2010) Understanding and facilitating BIM adoption in the AEC industry. Automation in construction, 19(8), 988–99.Harkola, J. and Greve, A. (1995) Diffusion of technology: cohesion or structural equivalence? in Academy of Management Proceedings, No. 1, 422–6.Hartmann, A. (2006) The context of innovation management in construction firms. Construction Management and Economics, 24, 567–78.Hartmann, T., Van Meerveld, H., Vossebeld, N. and Adriaanse, A. (2012) Aligning building information model tools and construction management methods. Automation in Construction, 22, 605–13.Henderson, R. and Clark, K. (1990) Architectural innovation: the reconfiguration of existing product technologies and the failure of established firms. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35, 9–22.Ho, Y.T. and Feng C.W. (2013) An information-flow-based organisational framework to streamline the process of employing BIM within construction projects, in Hajdu, M.: Skibniewski, M. (eds.) Procs Creative Construction Conference, 6–9 July 2013, Budapest, Hungary, pp. 163–70.Hughes, W. (1991) Modelling the construction projects using plans of work, in 4th Yugoslav Symposium on Organization and Management in Construction, Dubrovnik, Yugoslavia, pp. 81–6.Ibrahim, M. and Moselhi O. (2013) Self adaptive forecasting for construction projects, in Hajdu, M. and Skibniewski, M. (eds.) Procs Creative Construction Conference, 6–9 July 2013, Budapest, Hungary.Javidan, M. (1998) Core competence: what does it mean in practice? Long Range Planning, 31(1), 60–71.Kamien, M. and Schwartz, N. (1975) Market structure and innovation. Journal of Economic Literature, 23(1), 1–37.Keegan, A. and Turner, J.R. (2002) The management of innovation in project-based firms. Long Range Planning, 35(4), 367–88.King, N. and Majchrzak, A. (1996) Concurrent engineering tools: are the human issues being ignored. Engineering Management, 43(2), 189–201.Kinnear, P.R. and Gray, C.D. (2004) SPSS 12 made simple, Psychology Press, New York, NY.Kiviniemi, A., Tarandi, V., Karlshøj, J., Bell, H. and Karud, O.J. (2008) Review of the development and implementation of IFC compatible BIM.Koskela, L. and Vrijhoef, R. (2001) Is the current theory of construction a hindrance to innovation? Building Research and Information, 29(3), 197–207.Kwakye, A.A. (1997) Construction Project Administration in Practice. Longman [co-published with] the Chartered Institute of Building.Laborde, M. and Sanvido, V. (1994) Introducing new process technologies into construction companies. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 120(3), 488–508.Lampel, J. (2001) The core competencies of effective project execution the challenge of diversity. International Journal of Project Management, 19(8), 471–83.Latham, M. (1994) Constructing the Team: Joint Review of Procurement and Contractual Arrangements in the UK Construction Industry. Government Report.Lee, G., Sacks, R. and Eastman, C.M. (2006) Specifying parametric building object behaviour (BOB) for a building information modelling system. Automation in Construction, 15, 758–76.Ling, F.Y.Y. (2003) Managing the implementation of construction innovations. Construction Management and Economics, 21(6), 635–49.Linstone, H.A. and Turoff, M. (Eds.) (1975) The Delphi method: Techniques and applications, Vol. 29, AddisonWesley, Reading, MA.Lloyd-Walker, B., Mills, A. and Walker, D. (2014) Enabling construction innovation: the role of a no-blame culture as a collaboration behavioural driver in project alliances. Construction Management and Economics, 32(3), 229–45.Manley, K., Blayse, A. M. and McFallan, S. (2005) Demonstrating the benefits of construction innovation, in Creating an Entrepreneurial Economy: The Role of Enterprise and Innovation, International Research Conference, 7–8 July, University of Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand.Manseau, A. and Shields, R. (2005) Building Tomorrow: Innovation in Construction and Engineering, Ashgate Publishing, Aldershot, UK.Marquis, D.G. (1968) The anatomy of successful innovations. Readings in the management of innovation, Tushman, M.L. and Moore, W.L. (eds.), Ballinger Publishing Co, Boston, MA, pp. 79–87.McClelland, D.C. (1973) Testing for competence rather than for “intelligence”. American Psychologist, 28, 1–14.Migilinskas, D., Popov, V., Juocevicius, V. and Ustinovichius, L. (2013) The benefits, obstacles and problems of practical BIM implementation. Procedia Engineering, 57, 767–74.Miozzo, M. and Dewick, P. (2002) Building competitive advantage: innovation and corporate governance in European construction. Research Policy, 31(6), 989–1008.Mitropoulos, P. and Tatum, C.B. (1999) Technology adoption decisions in construction organizations. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 125(5), 330–8.Moore, D.R. and Dainty, A.R. (2001) Intra-team boundaries as inhibitors of performance improvement in UK design and build projects: a call for change. Construction Management & Economics, 19(6), 559–62.Murphy, M. E. (2014) Implementing innovation: a stakeholder competency-based approach for BIM. Construction Innovation, 14(4), 433–52.Murphy, M. E., Heaney G. and Perera S. (2011) A methodology for evaluating construction innovation constraints through project stakeholder competencies and FMEA. Journal of Construction Innovation, Construction Innovation: Information, Process, Management, 11(4), 416–40.Murphy, M. E. Heaney G. and Perera S. (2013) Modeling construction innovation constraints: a tool for sustaining innovation in projects, in Hajdu, M. and Skibniewski, M. (eds.) Proceedings, Creative Construction Conference 2013, 6–9 July 2013, Budapest, Hungary, pp. 525–35.Nahod,M.-M.,Vukomanovic,M.,andRadujkovic,M.(2013a) Framework for measuring and evaluating behavioral competencies in construction projects, in Hajdu, M. and Skibniewski, M. (eds.) Procs Creative Construction Conference 2013, 6–9 July 2013, Budapest, Hundary, pp. 536–45.Nahod, M.-M., Vukomanovic, M. and Radujkovic, M. (2013b) The impact of ICB 3.0 competencies on project management success. Procedia - Social and Behavioural Science, 74(1), 105–15.Nam, C.H. and Tatum, C.B. (1989) Toward an understanding of product innovation process in construction. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 115(4), 517–34.Nam, C.H. and Tatum, C.B. (1997) Leaders and champions for construction innovation. Construction Management Economics, 15, 259–70.Newton, P.W. (1999) Modelling innovation in AEC: understanding the fourth dimension of competition, http://bit. ly/1Bdp8Ug (accessed 19 July 2005).Nielsen, A. (2002) Use of FMEA – failure modes effects analysis on moisture problems in buildings. 6th Symposium on Building Physics in the Nordic Countries, Trondheim, Norway, June 17.Okoli, C. and Pawlowski, D. (2004) The Delphi method as a research tool: an example, design consideration and applications. Information and Management, 42, 15–29.Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2005) Oslo Manual: Guidelines for Collecting and Interpreting Innovation Data, OECD publishing, European Commission, Eurostat.Perera, S., Pearson, J., Zhou, L. and Ekundayo, D. (2013) Professional, academic and industrial development needs: a competency mapping and expert opinion review. International Journal of Strategic Property Management, Special Issue in Construction Education, 17(2), 143–60.Porter, M. (1980) Competitive Strategy, Techniques for Analysing Industries and Competitors, Free Press, New York, NY.Prahalad, C. K. and Hamel, G. (1990) The Core Competence of the Corporation, Harvard Business Review, Boston, MA.Pries, F. and Janszen, F. (1995) Innovation in the construction industry: the dominant role of the environment. Construction Management and Economics, 13, 43–51. Riddle, D. (2000) Why innovate? International Trade Forum, 2, 18–9.Rogers, E. (1995) Diffusion of Innovations, Simon & Schuster, New York, NY.Rosenberg, N. (1982) Inside the Black Box, Technology and Economics, Cambridge University Press, London.Rothwell, R. (1976) Innovation in textile machinery: some significant factors in success and failure, Science Policy Research Unit, Occasional Paper Series No. 2, June.Rothwell, R. (1992) Successful industrial innovation: critical factors for the 1990s. R&D Management, 22(3), 221–39.Sacks, R., Koskela, L., Dave, B.A. and Owen, R. (2010) Interaction of lean and building information modelling in construction. Journal of construction engineering and management, 136(9), 968–80.Salter, A. and Gann, D. (2003) Sources of ideas for innovation in engineering design. Research Policy, 32(8), 1309–24. Schmidt, J.B. (1995) New product mytopia. Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing, Winter 10(1), 23–34.Schumpeter, J.A. (1947) The creative response in economic history. Journal of Economic History, 7, 149–59.Seaden, G. (1996) Economics of innovation in the construction industry. Journal of Infrastructure Systems, 2(3), 103–7.Sebastian, R. (2011) Changing roles of the clients, architects and contractors through BIM. Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 18(2), 176–87.Shields, T., Silcock, G., Donegan, H. and Bell, Y. (1987) Methodological problems associated with the use of the Delphi technique. Fire Technology, 23(3), 175–85.Slaughter, E.S. (1998) Models of construction innovation. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 124(3), 226–31.Slaughter, E.S. (2000) Implementation of construction innovations. Building Research and Information, 28(1), 2–17. Spencer, S.M. and Spencer, L.M. (1993) Competence at work: models for superior performance, John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY.Sproull, L.S. and Goodman, P.S. (1990) Technology and organizations: integration and opportunities. Technology and organizations, 254–65.Steel, J., Drogemuller, R. and Toth, B. (2012) Model interoperability in building information modelling. Software & Systems Modelling, 11(1), 99–109.Steele, J. and Murray, M. (2004) Creating, supporting and sustaining a culture of innovation. Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 11(5), 316–22.Tatum, C.B. (1986) Potential mechanisms for construction innovation. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 112(2), 178–91.Tatum, C.B. (1988) Classification system for construction technology. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 114(3), 344–63.Tatum, C.B. (1989) Organizing to increase innovation in construction firms. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 115(4), 602–17.Teece, D.J., Pisano, G. and Shuen, A. (1997) Dynamic Capabilities and Strategic Management, Oxford University Press, Oxford.Toole, T.M. (1998) Uncertainty and home builders’ adoption of technological innovations. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 124(4), 323–32.Tushman, M.L. and Anderson, P. (1986) Technological discontinuities and organizational environments. Administrative Science Quarterly, 31, 439–65.Urabe, K. (1988) Innovation and the Japanese management system, in Urabe, K., Child, J. and Kagono, T. (eds.) Innovation and Management, International Comparisons, De Gruyter & Co., Berlin, pp. 3–25.Utterback, J.M. and Abernathy, W.J. (1975) A dynamic model of process and product innovation. Omega, 3(6), 639–56.Van der Panne, G., Van Beers, C. and Kleinknecht, A. (2003) Success and failure of innovation: a literature review. International Journal of Innovation Management, 7 (3), 309–38.Van der Ven, A.H. (1986) Central problems in the management of innovation. Management Science, 32, 590–607. Von Hippel, E. (1988) The Sources of Innovation, Oxford University Press, New York, NY.Voss, C.A. (1988) Implementation: a key issue in manufacturing technology: the need for a field of study. Research Policy, 17, 55–63.Wadalkar, M.S. and Pimplikar, S.S. (2012) Effective training program for gap closing in construction industry. Journal of Mechanical and Civil Engineering, 3, 31–8.Wagner, H.T., Morton, S.C., Dainty, A.R. and Burns, N.D. (2011) Path dependent constraints on innovation programmes in production and operations management. International Journal of Production Research, 49(11), 3069–85. Winch, G. (1998) Zephyrs of creative destruction: understanding the management of innovation. Building Research and Information, 26(5), 268–79.Wix, J. and Katranuschkov, P. (2002) Defining the matrix of communication processes in the AEC/FM industry: current developments and gap analysis, CIB w78 Conference, Aarhus School of Architecture, Denmark, pp. 20–8.Womack, J.P., Jones, D.T. and Roos, D. (1990) The Machine that Changed the World. Rawson Associates: Maxwell Macmillan, New York; Oxford.Yeung, J.F., Chan, A.P., Chan, D.W. and Li, L.K. (2007) Development of a partnering performance index (PPI) for construction projects in Hong Kong: a Delphi study. Construction Management and Economics, 25(12), 1219–37.Yu,W.D.,Cheng,S.T.,Wu,C.M.andLou,H.R.(2012)Aselfevolutionary model for automated innovation of construction technologies. Automation in Construction, 27, 78–88.Zuppa, D., Issa, R.R. and Suermann, P.C. (2009) BIM’s impact on the success measures of construction projects. Technical Council on Computing and Information Technology of ASCE Reston, VA.
Appendix 1Schedule of construct data (SoCD)Test ModelDelphi RoundsConstraint Classification MatrixInnovation Management FlowchartSTAGE I - Intention to InnovateActivity codeInnovationconstraintImplicit stakeholderCompetency failure Process StageOSDRPNManagement response activityActivity risk rankingRound 1 Unweighted Round 1 WeightedRound 2Round 3  (IMM)    CauseEffectA1Lack of clarity in Client requirementsClientInformation and CommunicationII686288Establish single-point client representative MediumHighMediumHighMediumA2Non-alignment of business needs with innovation ClientCost ManagementIIII64372Early cost analysis aligned with business strategyMediumHighMediumMediumMediumA3Failure to involve client in Supplier investigationsClientCulture and ValuesII783166Active user involvement in product developmentLowSevereHighHighSevereA4Conflict amongst groupings o the project teamf Project ManagerInformation and CommunicationIIII683144Establish clear definition of 'Project Intent'LowSevereHighHighSevereA5Failure to align stakeholder expectationsProject ManagerStrategy and PolicyVIV786336Cultural acceptance by all parties to participateHighHighMediumMediumHighA6Contract clause inadequate to facilitate innovation Project Manager Planning and AdministrationII677294Selection of appropriate procurement strategyHighHighMediumHighHighA7Lack of clarity in business benefits and incentivesDesignerInformation and CommunicationVV545100Communicate intention to adopt innovationMediumHighHighHighMediumA8Client reticence to proceed due to poor team buy-inDesignerCulture and ValuesII764168Establish client meetings to establish requirement LowSevereHighHighSevereA9Lack of early supplier involvement with the design SupplierTechnicalIIII683144Supplier involvement in design developmentLowSevereMediumHighHighTest ModelDelphi RoundsConstraint Classification MatrixInnovation Management FlowchartSTAGE II - Formulation of Design ConceptActivity codeInnovation constraintStakeholderCompetency Process StageOSDRPNManagement activityActivity risk rankingRound 1 Unweighted Round 1 WeightedRound 2Round 3  (IMM)    CauseEffectA10Client uncertainity about retur on investmentn ClientInformation and CommunicationIIII64372Establish early client commitment to innovationMediumHighMediumMediumMediumA11Lack of independent financial advice to the ClientClientCost ManagementVIIV876360Rigorous early cost analysi of adoption costss SevereMediumMediumMediumSevereA12No identifiable Innovation ChampionProject ManagerStrategy and PolicyII674168Identify and appoint Innovation ChampionHighHighMediumHighHighA13Poor technical knowledge of innovation by design staffProject ManagerInformation and CommunicationIII786336Risk assessment of designers competencyMediumMediumMediumMediumMediumA14No formal changemanagement systemProject Manager Programme Management IVIV777343Establish change- management protocol MediumHighMediumMediumSevereA15Failure to provide adequate resources for staffDesigner  Human ResourcesIIII765210  Ensure sustainable personnel (HR) in placeSevereSevereHighHighSevereA16Non-proactive information transfer by Designer staffDesignerCulture and ValuesIII686288Promote 'Project Intent' amongst technical staffSevereHighMediumHighSevereA17Cursory research into design problemDesignerTechnicalIIII775245   Establish R&D procedures/monitoring SevereMediumMediumMediumMediumA18Failure of supplier to obtain the necessary insurancesSupplier Planning and AdministrationIIII554100Agree insurance liabilities with supplierMediumMediumLowLowLowTest ModelDelphi RoundsConstraint Classification MatrixInnovation Management FlowchartSTAGE III - Resolution of the Detailed DesignActivity codeInnovation constraintStakeholderCompetency Process StageOSDRPNManagement response activityActivity risk rankingRound 1 Unweighted Round 1 WeightedRound 2Round 3  (IMM)    CauseEffectA19Concerns at End-user nonparticipation in discussionsClientTechnicalII764168Establish client feedback control mechanismsLowHighMediumMediumMediumA20Late submission of risk register by key stakeholdersProject Manager Programme Management VIV665180Assess programme with risk control measuresMediumHighMediumMediumSevereA21Inaccuracies of structural information for fabricationProject ManagerInformation and CommunicationVIV857280Establish design validation controlsMediumHighMediumMediumSevereA22Lack of client confidence in coordination of team info.DesignerTechnicalII873168Strategic assessment of innovation with ClientHighHighMediumHighHighA23Inconsistencies between information across teamDesignerInformation and CommunicationIIIII885320Establish procedures for design communicationHighSevereHighHighHighA24Probematic integration  with associated systemsDesignerTechnicalIIII775245Technical analysis of  innovation amongst teamHighSevereHighHighHighA25Lack of early integration of Supplier into team meetingsSupplierInformation and CommunicationVVI877392Establish regular Supplier input to project LowHighMediumMediumSevereA26Failure of 'innovation intent' to meet Building RegulationsSupplierTechnicalIIIIII786336Early liaison with statutory agencies / bodiesLowHighMediumMediumSevereTest ModelDelphi RoundsConstraint Classification MatrixInnovation Management FlowchartSTAGE IV - Preparation of Production InformationActivity codeInnovation constraintStakeholderCompetency Process StageOSDRPNManagement response activityActivity risk rankingRound 1 Unweighted Round 1 WeightedRound 2Round 3  (IMM)    CauseEffectA27Omission of key associated work packagesProject ManagerTechnicalIVIV776294Review programme against innovation requirements MediumHighMediumHighHighA28Lack of management support for innovation adoptionProject Manager  Human ResourcesVVI693162Reinforce 'Project Intent' to project team HighHighMediumMediumHighA29Insufficient allowance for innovation in tendering periodProject Manager Planning and AdministrationIVIII796378   Establish innovationfocused tendering processHighSevereMediumHighSevereA30Lack of information in tender documentsDesignerInformation and CommunicationVIV857280Innovation briefing meeting with potential tendererss LowHighHighHighSevereA31Failure of supplier to meet tender programmeDesignerTechnicalIVIII576210Preparation of innovation tender documentationHighHighHighHighHighA32Lack of independent anlaysis on design modelsSupplierTechnicalIIIII7107490Manufacture of innovation prototypeSevereMediumMediumLowSevereA33Failure of concrete castings a installation staget Supplier Programme Management IVIII797441Early testing of working innovation prototypeLowHighMediumMediumSevereTest ModelDelphi RoundsConstraint Classification MatrixInnovation Management FlowchartSTAGE V - Preparation for ImplementationActivity codeInnovationconstraintStakeholderCompetency Process StageOSDRPNManagement activityActivity risk rankingRound 1 Unweighted Round 1 WeightedRound 2Round 3  (IMM)    CauseEffectA34Cost of optic fibres exceeded project budgetClientCost ManagementIIIII885320Establish innovation cost monitoring mechanismMediumSevereMediumHighSevereA35Lack of motivation by team members Project ManagerCulture and ValuesVIV664114Ensure  tenderer 'buy-in' to the innovation HighSevereHighHighHighA36Incorrect costing of innovation by tenderersProject ManagerInformation and CommunicationIVIV675210Establish innovation workshops amongst teamSevereHighMediumMediumSevereA37Lack of coordination of building trades on siteProject Manager Programme Management VIIV865240Establish project controls with construction teamHighSevereHighHighHighA38Inadequate allowances for sourcing and deliverySupplier Programme Management IVIII667252Ensure coordination with project programmeMediumSevereMediumHighHighTest ModelDelphi RoundsConstraint Classification MatrixInnovation Management FlowchartSTAGE VI - Implementation of the innovationActivity codeInnovation constraintStakeholderCompetency Process StageOSDRPNManagement response activityActivity risk rankingRound 1 Unweighted Round 1 WeightedRound 2Round 3  (IMM)    CauseEffectA39Failure to meet cost estimatesProject ManagerCost ManagementVI III575175Ensure on-going cost milestones are metMediumHighMediumHighHighA40Inadequate, inexperienced site supervisionProject Manager Programme Management IIIII787392Ensure programme milestones are metMediumHighMediumHighSevereA41Concerns at adequacy of the commissioning processProject ManagerTechnicalVIIV786336Establish agreed commissioning procedures HighHighMediumHighSevereA42Acceptance of unsatisfactory work practicesDesignerTechnicalVIIII786336On-site monitoring of innovation integrationSevereHighHighHighSevereA43Late integration of specialist sub-contractor requirementsSupplier Programme Management VVI585200Supplier to maintain service milestonesMediumHighHighHighMediumA44Delays due to non-diligent sit inspection e SupplierTechnicalVIV766252Establish on-site technical feedback procedures SevereHighHighHighSevereA45Delays to installation due to non-availability of SupplierSupplierInformation and CommunicationVIVI385120Post permanent Supplier personnel on siteMediumSevereHighHighSevereTest ModelDelphi RoundsConstraint Classification MatrixInnovation Management FlowchartSTAGE VII - HandoverActivity codeInnovationconstraintStakeholderCompetency Process StageOSDRPNManagement activityActivity risk rankingRound 1 Unweighted Round 1 WeightedRound 2Round 3  (IMM)    CauseEffectA46Failure to maintain bespoke records of the innovationProject ManagerCost/Time ManagementVIV664114Cost/Programme analysis of implementationMediumMediumMediumMediumMediumA47Disbandment of key project personnel post-handoverDesignerTechnicalIIII32212Focused exploitation strategy for re-useLowHighMediumHighHighA48Poor stakeholder evaluation of innovation post-handoverSupplierTechnicalVIV465120Technical review of implementationMediumHighMediumHighMedium210	Murphy et al.Innovation management model	211