Interpreting risk allocation mechanism in public–private partnership projects: an empirical study in a transaction cost economics perspectiveXiao‐Hua Jin & Hemanta DoloiTo cite this article: Xiao‐Hua Jin & Hemanta Doloi (2008) Interpreting risk allocation mechanism in public–private partnership projects: an empirical study in a transaction cost economics perspective, Construction Management and Economics, 26:7, 707-721, DOI:10.1080/01446190801998682To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/01446190801998682Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rcme20  
Construction Management and Economics (July 2008) 26, 707–721Interpreting risk allocation mechanism in public– private partnership projects: an empirical study in a transaction cost economics perspectiveXIAO-HUA JIN* and HEMANTA DOLOIFaculty of Architecture Building and Planning, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, AustraliaReceived 10 June 2007; accepted 19 February 2008Risk allocation in public–private partnership (PPP) projects is currently claimed as capability driven. While lacking theoretical support, the claim is often ‘violated’ by current industrial practice. There is thus a need for formal mechanisms to interpret why a particular risk is retained by government in one project while transferred to private partners in another. From the viewpoint of transaction cost economics (TCE), integrated with the resource-based view (RBV) of organizational capabilities, this paper proposed a theoretical framework for understanding risk allocation practice in PPP projects. The theories underlying the major constructs and their links were articulated. Data gathered from an industry-wide survey were used to test the framework. The results of multiple linear regression (MLR) generally support the proposed framework. It has been found that partners’ risk management routine, mechanism, commitment, cooperation history, and uncertainties associated with project risk management could serve to determine the risk allocation strategies adopted in a PPP project. This theoretical framework thus provides both government and private agencies with a logical and complete understanding of the process of selecting the allocation strategy for a particular risk in PPP projects. Moreover, it could be utilized to steer the risk allocation strategy by controlling certain critical determinants identified in the study. Study limitations and future research directions have also been set out.Keywords: Risk management, risk allocation, organizational capability, commitment, uncertainty, transaction cost economics, PPP.IntroductionRapid urbanization in many countries has led to a massive demand for investment in infrastructure (World Bank, 2006). Conventional provision of infrastructure funded by governments has led to inefficacies and subjected infrastructure development to the availability of governmental funds. As a mechanism to balance such anomalies, a range of public–private partnership (PPP) arrangements are rapidly becoming the preferred way to provide public services in many countries, including Australia (Doloi and Jin, 2007). PPP has been interpreted widely to encompass any arrangement between the government and private sector to deliver services to the public (Li and Akintoye, 2003). However, PPPs in this study refer to a complex long-term contractual arrangementinvolving the provision of services that require the construction of infrastructure assets (DFA, 2005c). Though there are many parties involved in a PPP transaction, the focus in this study is on two broad groups of stakeholders, i.e. the government agency and the private consortium, between whom risks are allocated.  The core principle for PPPs is value for money (VFM) (DTF, 2000). One of the greatest VFM drivers is risk transfer, which means appropriate risks can be transferred to the private sector, which is supposed to be capable of managing those risks better (Hayford, 2006). Accordingly, infrastructure services may be provided more cheaply and of a higher quality than in the conventional way. However, the complexity of the arrangements and incomplete contracting nature have led to increased risk exposure for all the parties involved (Woodward, 1995). Effective risk allocation in PPP*Author for correspondence. E-mail: ji@unimelb.edu.auprojects is therefore no easy job. How do public andConstruction Management and EconomicsISSN 0144-6193 print/ISSN 1466-433X online # 2008 Taylor & Francis http://www.tandf.co.uk/journalsDOI: 10.1080/01446190801998682  
private partners allocate risks between them? In particular, how does a government agency respond to risks? Why is a particular risk transferred to the private consortium in one project while retained by government or shared in another? Most important, is there any mechanism guiding the formation of risk allocation strategies? The answers to these questions are critically important to the success (or failure) of PPP projects (DFA, 2005a; Jin and Doloi, 2007b).  In this paper, a theoretical framework is proposed to address those questions in the perspective of transaction cost economics (TCE), integrated with the resource-based view (RBV) of organizational capabilities. This is part of a large project aiming at developing robust knowledge-based system techniques capable of improving risk allocation and management processes. In the next section, risk allocation practices in PPP projects, organizational capability and transaction cost economics are briefly reviewed. The theoretical framework and its key constructs are then described. Research methodology and the results of an industrywide survey in Australia are then reported, followed by a discussion on research limitations and future directions. Finally, a brief conclusion is presented.Literature reviewRisk allocation in PPP projectsRisk is ‘the chance of something happening that will have an impact upon objectives’ (SAA, 1998). Construction projects manifest more risks than do other industries (Han and Diekmann, 2004). The success of a project management exercise depends very much on the extent to which the risks involved can be identified, measured, understood, reported, communicated and allocated to the appropriate parties (Ren, 1994; Tah and Carr, 2000). However, evidence from projects worldwide shows that this is not a straightforward event and risks are not managed properly (Thompson and Perry, 1992).  In PPP projects, it is critical for government to understand that it is sub-optimal for them not only to retain but to transfer inappropriate risks (Arndt, 1999). This is because transfer of risks to the private sector comes at a price (Hayford, 2006) and improper allocation of risks among stakeholders may lead to higher than necessary prices (Thomas et al., 2003). Inappropriate risk allocation can also damage the VFM proposition because the measures of the whole-of-life project cost are highly sensitive to the allocation of risks (DFA, 2005b). If risks rest inappropriately with the public sector, government would raise taxes or reduce services to pay for its obligations when the risks materialize. In contrast, if risks rest inappropriately with the private sector, excess premiums would be charged to the government or even directly to the end users (Thompson and Perry, 1992).  Many governments now recognize that privatization is a partnership in which they must retain some risk. However, a perception that privatization involves transfer of all risks to the private sector was still prevalent in many countries until recently (Faulkner, 2004). Sometimes risks will inevitably be allocated to the party least able to refuse them rather than the party best able to manage them, especially when the government maintains maximum competitive tension (Thomas et al., 2003). In Australia, for example, PPP is now seen as an opportunity for government to avoid almost all the risks by purchasing outputs. It has been expressly made clear to the private party that the allocation is offered for acceptance and little divergence is expected (DTF, 2000). This structure implicitly creates an initial risk allocation in which all risks associated with delivering the outputs to the specified service standards are allocated to the private party.  Nonetheless, ongoing efforts have been made to seek an optimal risk allocation by investigating which categories of risk governments should generally accept or transfer and, critically, why (DFA, 2005b). Optimal risk allocation seeks to minimize the risks to the project by allocating particular risks to the party in the best position to control them (Kangari, 1995; Hayford, 2006). This is because the party possessing the best capability of management with respect to a particular risk has the best opportunity to reduce the likelihood of the risk eventuation and to control the consequences of the risk if it materializes, and thus should assume it (Thomas et al., 2003).Organizational capabilitiesAs RM capabilities of involved parties have become the major concern when choosing a risk allocation strategy, a review on organizational capability is necessary. The notion of capabilities can be traced back to Penrose’s (1959) work. While resources are available to all firms, the ‘capability’ to deploy them productively is not uniformly distributed (Penrose, 1959, p.25). With the evolution of the resource-based view (RBV), it has been increasingly recognized that the RBV explains competitive heterogeneity based on the premise that close competitors differ in their capabilities and resources in important and durable ways (Helfat and Peteraf, 2003). Literature on RBV conceptualizes resources and capabilities in two different ways. Barney (1991), among others, tended to define resources broadly by including all assets, capabilities, organizational processes, firm attributes, information, knowledge, etc.However, another set of authors (see, for example, Amit and Schoemaker, 1993; Grant, 1991; Makadok, 2001) sought to clearly delineate between resources and capabilities by arguing that resources are accessible by all firms at prevailing factor prices, whereas capabilities refer to a firm’s capacity to deploy resources. In this paper, the latter definition of organizational capabilities was adopted.Transaction cost economics (TCE)Risk allocation in PPP projects is suitable to be viewed from a TCE perspective because any issue that can be formulated as a contracting problem can be investigated to advantage in transaction cost economizing terms (Williamson, 1985). The suitability also arises from many features of PPPs, which include incomplete contracting, long-term partnerships, heavy investment in assets, complex uncertainty, etc. (Jin and Doloi, 2007a). Transaction costs are the costs of running the economic system (Arrow, 1969). Such costs are the economic equivalent of friction in physical systems and distinguished from production costs (Williamson, 1985). TCE poses the problem of economic organization as a problem of contracting and assumes that human agents are (1) subject to bounded rationality, where behaviour is ‘intendedly rational but only limitedly so’ (Simon, 1961, p.xxiv); and (2) given to opportunism, which is a condition of ‘self-interest seeking with guile’ (Williamson, 1985).  TCE further maintains that there are rational economic reasons for organizing some transactions one way and other transactions another. The principal dimensions with respect to which transactions differ are (1) asset specificity, the degree to which an asset can be redeployed to alternative uses and by alternative users without sacrificing productive value (Williamson, 1996, p.59); (2) uncertainty, which may arise from ‘state of nature’ or changes in the external environment affecting a system (Rao, 2003, p.17) or when incomplete contracting and asset specificity are joined (Williamson, 1996, p.60); and (3) frequency, which admits the fact that the pairwise identity of the parties matters and has pervasive consequences for the organization of economic activity (Williamson, 1996, p.61). The consequent organizational imperative is to ‘organize transactions so as to economize on bounded rationality while simultaneously safeguarding them against the hazards of opportunism’ (Williamson, 1985). By assigning transactions to governance structures in a discriminating way, transaction costs are economized (Williamson, 1985). However, transaction costs are always assessed in a comparative institutional way (Williamson, 1996). Empirical research on transaction cost issues remains whether organizational relations align with the attributes of transactions as predicted by transaction cost reasoning or not (Williamson, 1985).  Although the RBV of organizational capability and the TCE are closely linked to the analysis of risk allocation, little research has been done by integrating these two theories. This might be due to the longexisting argument between them. The literature on TCE, for example, argues that much of the literature on organizational capabilities fails to pay attention to the business environment and the resultant potential for opportunism (Foss, 1996; Williamson, 1999; Mahoney, 2001). On the other hand, the literature on organizational capabilities argues that TCE underemphasizes differences in firm capabilities (Winter, 1988). It is submitted in this paper, however, that the RBV of organizational capability and TCE are complementary in nature. This is because the role of asset specificity, which is one of the most critical components in TCE, is most evident in the description of organizational capability. Moreover, while TCE holds that transaction frequency matters, the RBV of organizational capability attends to the fact that past transactions between partners may generate processes that alter the calculus for future transactions (Ring and Van de Ven, 1994; Gulati, 1995). These make the formulations of TCE and RBV of organizational capability closely overlap (Rao, 2003, p.32).Theoretical framework and hypothesesBased on the literature review, a model that could facilitate the interpretation of risk allocation practice in PPP projects would be expected. While organizational capability in RM remains one of the major concerns, it is submitted in this paper that the decision making on risk allocation can be better explained when a holistic view is adopted. This could be achieved by integrating TCE with a RBV of organizational capability, with the former taking into consideration other important factors such as uncertainties. Therefore, choosing a risk allocation strategy could actually be viewed as the process of deciding the proportion of risk management responsibility between internal and external organizations based on a series of characteristics of the RM service transaction in question. The characteristics can be categorized into (1) partners’ RM capability, which is the organizational capability in RBV and can be deemed as major specified assets of TCE; (2) partners’ cooperation history, which approximates to transaction frequency of TCE; (3) RM environment uncertainty; and (4) partners’ RM commitment, which matches behavioural uncertainty of TCE. Accordingly, a theoretical framework as shown in Figure1 is established based on the following main hypotheses:Figure 1	Theoretical framework for risk allocation in PPP projectsHypothesis 10: Partners’ RM capability (specific assets), partners’ cooperation history (transaction frequency), and environment uncertainties determine partners’ RM commitment (behavioural uncertainties); andHypothesis 20: Partners’ RM capability (specific assets), partners’ cooperation history (transaction frequency), environment uncertainties, and partners’ RM commitment (behavioural uncertainties) determine risk allocation strategy (governance structure).The constructs and their links are discussed below.Organizational capability (specific assets)It is proposed in this study that the most important specified assets in any RM service transaction would be the organizational RM capability. This is because the role of asset specificity is most evident in the description of organizational capability and thus remains closest to the TCE formulations (Rao, 2003, p.32). RM capability can be further operationalized into RM routine and mechanism.RM routine (assets specificity)Organizations develop capabilities by carrying out related activities repeatedly (Nonaka and Takeuchi, 1995). Differences in past activities thus lead to heterogeneous capabilities. Firms are entities that possess heterogeneous capabilities as a function of their routines and search processes (Nelson and Winter, 1982). Over time, the knowledge accumulated through ‘learning-by-doing’ is embedded in bundles of ‘routines’ that are likened to the genetic material of the firm and serve as organizational memory to repetitively execute the sequence of productive activities without trouble.  Though the routines embody knowledge and competence in carrying out RM activities, they indicate that alternative uses could have been achieved without sacrificing productive value. That is to say, the longer the history of a RM routine (a transaction-specific asset), the more productive activities have been carried out, which means more alternative use has been made of the asset, and accordingly, the less specific the RM routines become. This is particularly understandable in the context of the construction industry, where products are generally of a one-off nature, which is distinct from the repetitive nature in such industries as manufacturing.RM mechanism (specific assets maturity)Capabilities tend to evolve over time to reflect the joint effects of passive learning-by-doing and deliberate firmlevel investments in learning and making improvements (Ethiraj et al., 2005). They are more likely to develop effectively when purposefully designed mechanisms are established to accumulate, store, integrate and diffuse relevant organizational knowledge acquired through experience (Kale et al., 2002). These integrative mechanisms act as an important locus of firm learning (Pisano, 1994). Thus, while greater RM experience may be a necessary condition for organizations to build RM capability, it may not be sufficient. RM capability would also rest upon how effectively the organization is able to capture, share and disseminate the RM know-how.  According to PMBOK (PMI, 2001), risk management is a systematic mechanism, which involves the following major processes: (1) risk identification; (2) risk analysis; (3) risk response planning; and (4) risk monitoring and control. All together, these individual processes determine the soundness of the whole system. Therefore, the aggregated level of each process would be used to measure the maturity level of a partner’s RM mechanism.Partners’ cooperation history (transaction frequency)TCE fully accepts the description of ex ante bidding competition but insists that the study of contracting include ex post features (Williamson, 1996). Faceless contracting is thus superseded by contracting where the pairwise identity of the parties matters. Unlike existing goods, appropriate RM for building and construction projects is difficult to obtain in a one-off transaction and requires time to develop (Jin and Ling, 2005). The interaction among partners during that time necessitates communication and governance, the challenges of which partners could better address if they have had previous transactions (Heide and Miner, 1992; Parkhe, 1993). Communication and governance efficiencies increase as partners work together over time because such a relationship serves as a brake on opportunism for both partners (Williamson, 1983; Dyer, 1994, 1996).UncertaintyThe core problem of an economic organization is that offacinganddealingwithuncertainty(Koopmans,1957). Uncertainties may arise from ‘state-of-nature’ or changes in the external environment affecting a system (Rao, 2003, p.17). However, strategic features such as nondisclosure, disguise or distortion of information are unavoidablypresentwhenpartiesarejoinedinacondition of bilateral dependency (Williamson, 1996, p.60). Behavioural uncertainties, which arise when incomplete contractingandassetspecificityarejoined,causehazards. As behavioural uncertainty has been particularly recognized in TCE, uncertainty is grouped into environmental and behavioural uncertainty in this paper.Environmental uncertaintyEnvironmental uncertainty is a multidimensional concept and its effects on organizations are context-specific (Bourgeois, 1980; Milliken, 1987). It is related with both micro and macro business environments (Dess and Beard, 1984; Miller, 1987). Partnership is potentially among the better governance forms when external uncertainty is high because of risk-sharing effects (Williamson, 1991). However, partnerships may suffer more due to an increased probability of opportunistic behaviour by individual parties (Luo, 2007), especially when they anticipate sustained or prolonged uncertainty (Brown et al. 2000). Based on the literature review, environment uncertainty is grouped into five categories in this paper, as shown in Table1.Organizational RM commitment (behavioural uncertainty)Transaction costs are principally associated with guarding against opportunism, which triggers behavioural uncertainty (Williamson, 1975). Opportunism and commitment are reversely related (Kim and Mahoney, 2006) because commitment can serve as a brake to opportunism (Williamson, 1983). Organizational commitment is a willingness of partners to make short-term sacrifices to realize long-term benefits in the relationship (Dwyer et al., 1987; Anderson and Weitz, 1992; Holm et al., 1999). This kind of commitment suggests a level of ‘affective attachment’ based on the norm of reciprocity and mutual attraction (Gouldner, 1960; Eisenberger et al., 1990). With lowered commitment, environment uncertainty impedes collaboration, and performance deteriorates (Luo, 2007). In this study, organizational commitment to RM would be treated as a latent variable, which would be measured by observed variables including willingness, confidence and reward expectation (see Table2). This method has been successfully used in previous research (see Mowday et al., 1979 and Johnson et al., 2002).Risk allocation strategies (governance structure)Risk allocation is the process of dividing and assigning the responsibility associated with a particular risk for a variety of hypothetical circumstances (Uff, 1995). It was argued as a transaction of risk management responsibility between potential risk bearers (Jin and Doloi, 2007a). Thus, different allocation strategies are in fact different governance structures of risk management. TCE holds that with a certain combination of the transaction dimensions, an organization will respond to them by adopting a certain governance structure to economize on transaction costs (Williamson, 1985). The structures include hierarchy (internal or ‘make’), market(externalor‘buy’),andhybridmode(both‘make’ and ‘buy’) (Williamson, 1996). Correspondingly, in a given situation of the aforementioned features in a PPP project, a specific risk allocation strategy, i.e. a specific proportion of a given risk to be transferred from public partner to the private partner, will be agreed by partners in order to reduce transaction costs. This proportion or strategy can be 100% (entirely transfer or ‘buy’), 0% (entirely retain or ‘make’), or somewhere in-between (‘make and buy’), e.g. 50% (bear equally). With the TCE assumption of transaction cost economizing purpose, the inherent mechanism, which assigns different RM transactions to different governance structures (transfer proportions), attracts major attention in this paper.Table 1	Classification of RM environment uncertainty in PPP projectsCategoryCodeEnvironment uncertaintyMeasurementInstitutionalEI01Political system stability15volatile; 55stableEI02Legislative system stability15volatile; 55stableEI03Approval process15hierarchical; 55convenientSocial and industrialES01Community attitude15resistant; 55supportiveES02Stability of related industry15volatile; 55stableES03Logistics infrastructure availability15unavailable; 55availableES04Public involvement15lacking; 55activeEconomicEE01National economy condition15volatile; 55stableEE02Financial market maturity15immature; 55matureEE03Insurance market maturity15immature; 55matureEE04Raw material supply15scarce; 55abundantEE05Workforce supply15scarce; 55abundantOrganizationalEO01Public partner’s general experience in similar projects15scarce; 55abundantEO02Public partner’s risk attitude15averse; 55seekingEO03Public partner’s probity15corrupt; 55incorruptEO04Consortium’s financial capability15incompetent; 55competentEO05Financier’s reputation/credit15unreliable; 55reliableEO06Consortium’s technical capability15incompetent; 55competentEO07Designer’s general experience in similar projects15scarce; 55abundantEO08Contractor’s general experience in similar projects15scarce; 55abundantEO09Operator’s general experience in similar projects15scarce; 55abundantProject-specificEP01Project similarity with market precedents15distinct; 55identicalEP02Design flexibility15rigid; 55flexibleEP03Project technical novelty15obsolete; 55pioneerEP04Project constructability15poor; 55suitableEP05Reliability of reference data15unreliable; 55reliableEP06Exposure of project information15secret; 55entirely publicizedEP07Competition in project tendering15little; 55intensiveEP08Accuracy of contract provision15ambiguous; 55explicitEP09Effectiveness of partners’ communication15ineffective; 55effectiveEP10Effectiveness of dispute resolution mechanism15ineffective; 55effectiveEP11Project sector05economic; 15socialEP12Project valueAU$ millionEP13Project concession durationYearEP14Project construction duration (est.)MonthEP15Project contract negotiation durationMonthResearch methodBased on the literature review, an operationalized framework is further shown in Figure2. The operationalization of attributes of the constructs is presented in Table2 except for those of environment uncertainty, which are presented in Table1. In order to verify the theoretical framework, a questionnaire was designed closely based on the operationalized constructs. The questionnaire asked respondents to provide reliable information about a PPP project, in which they had appropriateinvolvementand/orknowledge.Respondents were also required to provide information about their PPP experience and designation.  A pilot survey was first conducted during a PPP workshop funded by the University of Melbourne.Among 65 attendants from industry, six provided feedback on the relevance, accuracy, phrasing, sequencing and layout of the questionnaire. Following the pilot survey and consequent refinement of the questionnaire, an industry-wide questionnaire survey was carried out in Australia, which constituted the primary data collection method in this study. The target population of the survey was all the professionals and decision makers who have been involved in risk management of PPP projects in Australia. They include people from both public and private sectors. However, random sampling is difficult owing to the difficulty in finding out the exact population. Therefore, judgmental or purposive sampling, in which a sample is drawn using judgmental selection procedures (Tan, 2004), was used. The strategy for sample selection was first toTable 2	Operationalization of framework constructsConstructCodeAttributeMeasurementPartner’s RM routineRtnPubPublic partner’s experience in managing risk X15scarce; 55abundantRtnPriPrivate partner’s experience in managing risk X15scarce; 55abundantPartner’s RM mechanismMchPubMaturity of public partner’s identification, analysis, response planning, and monitoring and control mechanisms for risk X (the four variables were subject to a confirmatory factor analysis and statistically converged to one factor)15immature; 55matureMchPriMaturity of private partner’s identification, analysis, response planning, and monitoring and control mechanisms for risk X (the four variables were subject to a confirmatory factor analysis and statistically converged to one factor)15immature; 55maturePartner’s cooperation historyCoopPubPriCooperation history between public partner and leading members of private partnerNumber of previous cooperationCoopPriCooperation history among leading members of private partnerNumber of previous cooperationPartner’s RM commitmentCmtPubPublic partner’s willingness to put in greater effort than normal to manage risk X; public partner’s confidence in managing risk X; public partner’s expectation on possible gains by managing risk X (the three variables were subject to a confirmatory factor analysis and statistically converged to one factor)15very weak; 55very strongCmtPriPrivate partner’s willingness to put in greater effort than normal to manage risk X; public partner’s confidence in managing risk X; public partner’s expectation on possible gains by managing risk X (the three variables were subject to a confirmatory factor analysis and statistically converged to one factor)15very weak; 55very strongRisk allocation strategyTrsfProportion of risk management task transferred from public to private partner for risk X15retain (almost) all; 25transfer a small portion; 35equally share; 45retain a small portion;55transfer (almost) allidentify PPP infrastructure projects in the Australian market, then to identify major partners of the identified projects,andfinallytoidentify professionalsanddecision makers in major partners’ organizations from the public domain. In total, 386 questionnaires were distributed. The returned questionnaires were checked and edited to ensure completeness and consistency. The data were thenstoredintoacomputerandanalysedusingStatistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) software.Multiple linear regressionMultiple linear regression (MLR) analysis was conducted in this study to develop models to determine the relationship between explanatory and response variables (see Table1 and Table2) of the theoretical framework. The models were developed using SPSS software. The stepwise method was used to select explanatory variables. This method was adopted because it accommodates partial correlation structures for variables already in the model (Jin and Ling, 2006). Regression analysis for a model includes maximizing the multiple determination coefficient (R2), minimizing autocorrelation, and only including in the model the variables that are statistically significant in t-tests. A model should also be statistically significant in F-tests in order to prove that the included independent variables are capable of explaining the variation in the dependent variable. The optimum regression model should be the one that fits the data the best and yields the most accurate prediction of dependent variable.Figure 2	Operationalized theoretical framework for risk allocation in PPP projects  R2, the multiple determination coefficient, and R2adj, the adjusted R2, were computed for each model. R2, ranging from 0 to 1, represents the proportion of the variation in response variables that is explained by the set of explanatory variables selected. Computing R2adj is especially necessary when comparing two or more models that predict the same dependent variable but have different numbers of explanatory variables (Levine et al., 2002).  In this study, the Durbin–Watson statistic and variance inflationary factor (VIF) were used to check collinearity among explanatory variables for the model as a whole and for individual explanatory variables, respectively. The Durbin–Watson statistic ranges in value from 0 to 4. A value near 2, toward 0, or toward 4 indicates non-autocorrelation, positive autocorrelation or negative autocorrelation, respectively. If a set of explanatory variables is uncorrelated, VIF is equal to 1.If a set is highly intercorrelated, VIF might even exceed 10. In this study, the threshold is set at 5.0 (Levine et al., 2002). This means that when each VIF , 5.0, there is little evidence of collinearity among a set of explanatory variables.  Residual analysis was also undertaken in this study to check normality of distribution of variables and appropriateness of MLR models.Results and discussionThree hundred and eighty-six survey packages were sent out in Australia by e-mail and recipients were invited to respond within two months. In total, 44 useful responses were received. The survey response rate of 11.4% is acceptable for a survey of this nature (De Vaus, 2001). The profile of the respondents is shown in Table3. They were deemed appropriate to provide reliable responses to the survey because of their ample experience in PPP projects and in the construction industry.  For the sake of brevity, only the MLR analysis results of the allocation mechanism of the risk of ‘demand below anticipation’ (demand risk) are reported as an example in this paper. This risk means that the demand for contracted services is unfavourably below anticipation (Jin, 2007). The reason for choosing demand risk as an example is that demand risk is not only the major but the most controversial risk in PPP projects. It has been deemed as one of the major challenges that PPPs face (see e.g. Tiong, 1990; Carrillo et al., 2006), among others). Table4 presents the results of the MLR analysis, where the unstandardized coefficients of the optimum models to explain the response variables are shown and collinearity checked. All coefficients are statistically significant. The values of VIF are far less than 5, indicating little evidence of collinearity in the models.  As reported in Table5, all the three models are statistically fit with the significant values of F-statistic being close to zero. The values of R2adj, which are 0.597, 0.723 and 0.748, are relatively high in social science research. The values of Durbin–Watson statistics for all models are close to 2, excluding significant collinearity again as VIF did.  The values of mean of standardized residual of each model are all very close to zero. Correspondingly, all the values of standard deviation of standardizedItemCategoryFreq.%Respondents’ designationSenior level4193.2Mid-level36.8Junior level00.0Respondents’ experiences in construction industry( 5 years00.05–10 years1431.810–20 years1329.620–30 years1022.7. 30 years613.6Unknown12.3Respondents’ experiences in PPP projectsNone00.01–2 projects1022.73–5 projects1022.76–10 projects1636.4. 10 projects818.2Table 3	Profile of Respondentsresidual of each model are very close to 1. Therefore, the residuals generally follow a normal distribution. From the aforementioned results of MLR and residual analysis, it is safe to conclude that all the models are appropriate for the data and the included predictors are able to explain the dependent variables satisfactorily. In Table6, the influence of predictors on the three dependent variables has been mapped based on the optimum models. Details of the results are discussed in the following sections (refer to Table1 and Table2 for the code of variables).  It was found that a public partner’s better RM mechanism (MchPub) would build up their commitment to demand risk. The reason may be that an effective mechanism denotes superior RM capability, which will increase the partner’s confidence and commitment. An interesting but self-explanatory finding is that a risk-seeking public partner (EO02) is willing to be more committed. Risk attitude therefore does have an impact on the whole transaction system. This does not match traditional TCE, which holds that agents are risk-neutral (Williamson, 1996). However, the finding accorded with and extended Chiles and McMackin’s (1996) proposal to add risk attitude as another influential factor into TCE analysis. It is also not difficult to understand the importance of a financier’s reliability (EO05). The financier’s reliable support to the non-recourse assets during the operation phase of a PPP project will fend off unfavourable impacts, especially in a financial way, which may decrease the demand. It is logical that an experienced operator (EO09) can help to minimize the demand risk during the operation stage and in turn boost the public partner’s commitment. Finally, because infrastructure service demand is sensitively subject to the stability ofTable 4	Results of MLR analysisDependent var.PredictorBtSig.VIFPublic partner’s commitment(Constant)Public partner’s RM mechanism (MchPub)Cooperation history among private partners (CoopPri)Stability of related industry (ES02)National economy condition (EE01)Public partner’s risk attitude (EO02)Financier’s reputation/credit (EO05)Operator’s experience in similar projects (EO09)Accuracy of contract provision (EP08)24.4391.12120.28620.6030.860 0.3310.5470.51820.41123.7449.01623.83423.6824.735 2.1863.2034.46023.1310.0010.0000.0010.0010.000 0.0360.0030.0000.004N.A.1.4651.1341.7461.511 1.3621.2061.3101.356Private partner’s commitment(Constant)Private partner’s RM mechanism (MchPri)Cooperation history between public and private partners(CoopPubPri)Public partner’s RM commitment (CmtPub)Political system stability (EI01)Project technical novelty (EP03)0.3250.64720.28120.2320.2250.4700.4226.05422.86822.4302.0703.3010.6750.0000.0070.0200.0450.002N.A.1.0211.1821.0551.0331.166Proportion of risk transfer(Constant)Private partner’s RM routine (RtnPri)Public partner’s RM commitment (CmtPub)Private partner’s RM commitment (CmtPri)Legislative system stability (EI02)Public partner’s general experience in similar projects (EO01) 0.482Project technical novelty (EP03)Exposure of project information (EP06)Project construction duration (est.) (EP14)3.9870.46220.7580.54320.93120.4790.4000.0193.0923.02525.6603.22724.8583.51422.2832.8002.0780.0040.0050.0000.0030.0000.0010.0290.0080.045N.A.1.5781.1961.7401.2441.2841.4621.2951.123Notes: B5unstandardized coefficient; t5statistic of t-t N.A.5not applicable.Table 5	Summary of MLR modelsest; Sig.5significance level of t-test; VIF5variance inflationary factor (collinearity statistic);Dependent variableFSig.R2R2adjDurbin–WatsonPublic partner’s commitment15.0290.0000.7750.7231.785Private partner’s commitment13.7400.0000.6440.5971.748Transfer16.9920.0000.7950.7482.050Notes: F5statistic of F-test; Sig.5significance level of F-test; R25multiple determination coefficient; R2adj5adjusted multiple determinationcoefficient.national economy, a less volatile economy (EE01) will see a less fluctuant demand, which will also raise the partner’s commitment.  In contrast, cooperation history among private partners (CoopPri) was found to reduce a public partner’s commitment. This is understandable because long-term cooperation between private partners will decrease governance and communication costs. A low quality facility due to poor collaboration during construction, for example, will probably fail to attract enough end users and consequently see a lower than anticipated demand. The possible reason for stability of related industry (ES02) is that the public partner may find government’s marginal efficacy in addressing demand risk in a stabilized industry is not as high as in a volatile industry. They may thus prefer the private partner to shoulder this risk. Finally, a partnership arrangement should be an incomplete contract in nature, because of bounded rationality and possible opportunism. If the clause about demand risk disregards the uncertain nature of the long-term partnership and turns out to be too ‘accurate’ (EP08), it mayTable 6	Map of predictor’s influence on dependent variableCodePredictorDependent variableCmtPubCmtPriTrsfRtnPriPrivate partner’s RM routine+MchPubPublic partner’s RM mechanism+MchPriPrivate partner’s RM mechanism+CoopPubPriCooperation history between public and private partners2CoopPriCooperation history among private partners2CmtPubPublic partner’s RM commitmentN.A.22CmtPriPrivate partner’s RM commitmentN.A.+EI01Political system stability+EI02Legislative system stability2ES02Stability of related industry2EE01National economy condition+EO01Public partner’s general experience in similar projects+EO02Public partner’s risk attitude+EO05Financier’s reputation/credit+EO09Operator’s experience in similar projects+EP03Project technical novelty+2EP06Exposure of project information+EP08Accuracy of contract provision2EP14Project construction duration (est.)+Notes: +/2 denotes positive or negative influence; N.A. denote ‘not applicable’.impede the implementation of private ordering during the contract execution process and therefore decrease the public partner’s commitment.  Regarding the private partner’s commitment to demand risk, the important and dominant link between their RM mechanism (MchPri) and commitment is the same as that for the public partner. But the increase of a private partner’s commitment may also result from one macro and one micro influence. The former is a stable policy throughout the project life cycle (EI01). Owing to the involvement of the public partner, PPP projects will subject themselves much more to the change of relevant policy than other projects. In particular, the minimization of risks in later stages, such as demand risk, benefits from consistent policies that change little when compared with early stages. The latter influence is a novel project (EP03), which is expected to bring the benefits of innovation, one of the four PPP drivers. A technically novel project will provide more room for any feasible innovation from the private partner. The innovation increases asset specificity, which will unavoidably change the partner’s commitment positively.  On the other hand, cooperation history between public and private partners (CoopPubPri) and the public partner’s RM commitment (CmtPub) were the possible deadeners to the private partner’s commitment. The possible reason for the former is that the more times the public and private partners have cooperated, the private side may expect that more knowledge has been transferred to the other side. They may thus expect that the public side is willing to bear more risk than before. As for the latter, it is probably due to the request for balance in a partnership. If there is too much or too little contribution from both sides concurrently, the situation may be that no one attends to the risk or efforts overlap and are wasted. Therefore, if high commitment is perceived from the public partner, the private partner would be happy to take some off their shoulders.  Finally, regarding the risk allocation strategy, it was found that the private partner’s better RM routine (RtnPri) makes the public side transfer more demand risk. The private partner’s ample experience in managing the demand risk has two effects. It indicates that superior RM capability has been established and at the same time refers to lower assets specificity. These two effects hint at a market mechanism and denote that scale of economy and scope will be well achieved and total costs be decreased if the private partner dominates the RM. Accordingly, it makes the public side transfer more of the risk to the private side. Moreover, higher commitment of the private partner (CmtPri) may make them behave less opportunistically because commitment serves as a brake to opportunism. As a result, governance cost is cut down and transferring more risk becomes a better choice. It sounds strange that a public partner intends to transfer more risk if they have more general experience in similar projects (EO01). But when considering the highly uncertain nature of demand risk, it is not hard to comprehend the public side’s strong desire to pass on the risk, especially if they have learned by bitter experience. It was also found that in a more transparent project (EP06), a public partner is more reluctant to bear demand risk. This might be because the bounded rationality of all stakeholders is minimized and the whole project is under more scrutiny. So there is less chance for opportunistic behaviour, which reduces governance cost and encourages more risk transfer to the private side. Longer construction duration (EP14) would also result in more transfer of demand risk. A possible reason may be that longer construction is usually linked to gigantic project size and complex constructability, which could greatly increase construction time. A prolonged construction period will erode the length of payback period, during which demand risk becomes more critical. Since public partners usually don’t bear construction risk, they are unwilling to shoulder a demand risk that would be worsened by a time blow-up in construction.  On the other hand, the public partner’s higher RM commitment (CmtPub) is found to make them retain more risk, which is self-explanatory. Besides, an effective legislative system (EI02) would have the same effect probably because public partners prefer legal centralism or court orders to private settlements when disputes arise. Finally, a technically novel project (EP03) would also see the public partner bear more demand risk. A possible explanation may be that project development time and cost are usually expected to be reduced by innovation. A longer payback period thanks to such reduction would relieve revenue pressure and render demand risk less critical. The public partner thus would be less reluctant to shoulder some of the risk.  With the findings and discussion, it is proven that generally (1) a partner’s RM capability, cooperation history and environment uncertainties determine the partner’s RM commitment; and (2) with the partner’s RM commitment, these factors together determine the allocation strategy for a particular risk, in this paper, the risk of ‘demand below anticipation’. Though not each sub-hypothesis was supported, the two main hypotheses could be deemed as supported and resultantly the theoretical framework should be stated as logical and valid, both theoretically and empirically.Limitation and future researchOne major limitation in this study is that a linear relationship only between explanatory and response variables was considered in MLR analysis. Although the values of R2adj are high for social science research and important linearly bound determinants have not been identified, the related models cannot be used for more accurate prediction purposes because a portion of variance in the response variables, ranging from 25% to 40%, still cannot be explained by the predictors. However, non-linearity is not uncommon in realistic situations.  Another limitation is that MLR is basically probability-oriented and unable to identify all the factors necessary to reflect realistic situations (Thomas et al., 2006). The partners’ RM mechanism, for instance, was not included in the optimal model for risk allocation strategy although theoretically it has a causal relation with risk transfer. By using the stepwise analysis method, useful information was lost simultaneously when collinearity was minimized. In realistic situations, correlation among explanatory variables prevails, especially when the situation is complex and there are many variables involved. This partly explains why higher R2adj cannot be obtained in MLR analysis.  Therefore, future research requires non-probabilitybased analysis techniques and consideration of the nonlinear relationship. One suitable alternative is adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS), which combines the strengths of fuzzy logic and artificial neural networks and possesses the capability to handle unspecificity, uncertainty, non-linearity and complexity (Tsoukalas and Uhrig, 1997). Additionally, neural networks’ strong learning ability helps to make the system suitable for prediction. This technique has been adopted in the subsequent stages of the current research, which will be reported in another article.  As mentioned above, while the proposed framework can facilitate understanding of current risk allocation mechanism, it is unable to tell whether the current practice is optimal or not. In the subsequent stages of the current study, a fuzzy inference system was built based on expert knowledge to identify optimal and suboptimal risk allocation strategies. An ANFIS was further built to predict the optimal risk allocation strategy in different project scenarios. All the applications of artificial intelligence techniques will be reported in separate articles.ConclusionThis paper proposed a theoretical framework for understanding the underlying mechanism of risk allocation decision making in PPP projects from the TCE perspective. By further integrating the resourcebased view of organizational capabilities, this framework enables a logical and holistic interpretation of the mechanism underlying the decision-making process in the current risk allocation practice. Major components include partners’ risk management routine, mechanism, cooperation history, commitment and environment uncertainty. Their links were submitted as two main hypotheses, namely (1) partners’ RM capability, partners’ cooperation history, and environmental uncertainties determine partners’ RM commitment; and (2) partners’ RM capability, partners’ cooperation history, environmental uncertainties, and partners’ RM commitment determine risk allocation strategy. To verify the hypotheses, the framework was operationalized and data were collected in an industry-wide survey.  Taking a typical demand risk as an example, three models were developed using MLR technique. They not only fit the data well but also explained the variance of response variables satisfactorily. It was found that the decision on how much risk to transfer to the private partner was not directly driven by partners’ RM capability. The decision was actually made complying with TCE. In particular, a higher RM ‘routine’ of the private partner (i.e. lower asset specificity in TCE), higher commitment of the private partner (i.e. lower behavioural uncertainty in TCE), and lower uncertainty of some major environmental factors (i.e. lower environmental uncertainty in TCE, such as a less volatile legislative system, more mature technique, and longer construction period, among others) may make the public partner choose to transfer more demand risk (i.e. ‘buy’ more in TCE). Although organizational RM mechanism (i.e. the RBV of organizational capability) had little direct influence on the choice of risk allocation strategies, it exerted some indirect effects by changing partners’ RM commitment. It is noteworthy that partners’ cooperation history (i.e. transaction frequency in TCE) also had such indirect effects on risk allocation decision making by shaping partners’ commitment. Furthermore, partners’ RM commitment may be significantly manipulated by the situation of various business environmental factors.  With the tested framework based on TCE, risk allocation decision making was better interpreted rather than seen as a black box or only capability-driven. In the case of huge RM-specific investment, it might be more efficient for the public partner to retain most or all of the given risk. Without appropriate commitment from the private partner, if they are forced to bear a given risk, they may probably fail to efficiently manage that risk by charging higher premiums, even with excellent RM capability. Similarly, a volatile business environment should be taken as a warning signal, where the public partner should not transfer as much risk as they wish. If they do so under greater uncertainty, the project may end up with higher than necessary cost. Moreover, partners should also aim to build up a long-term cooperative relationship so that behavioural uncertainty and thereby transaction costs can be minimized. In a nutshell, the major determinants of a  partner’s risk management commitment and risk allocation decision making that were identified in this paper would help industrial professionals better understand the practice and underlying mechanism of risk allocation decision making, especially in an economic way.  Finally, it is noteworthy that the MLR analysis has its own inherent limitation. It is overshadowed by artificial intelligence techniques when dealing with issues characteristic of uncertainty, unspecificity and nonlinearity. It was thus suggested that the latter be used to further develop the proposed framework, which is currently in progress. The next research stages mainly include building a type of model to identify optimal risk and a type of model to predict optimal risk allocation strategy in different scenarios, with the artificial intelligence techniques.ReferencesAmit, R. and Schoemaker, P.J.H. (1993) Strategic assets and organizational rent. Strategic Management Journal, 14(1), 33–46.Anderson, E. and Weitz, B. (1992) The use of pledges to build and sustain commitment in distribution channels. Journal of Marketing Research, 29, 18–34.Arndt, R. (1999) Optimum risk transfer in Build-OwnOperate-Transfer projects: the challenge for governments. Transactions of Multi-Disciplinary Engineering, Australia, GE 22, 1–8.Arrow, K.J. (1969) The organization of economic activity: issues pertinent to the choice of market versus nonmarket allocation, in The Analysis and Evaluation of Public Expenditure: The PPB System. U.S. Joint Economic Committee, 91st Congress, 1st Session, US Government Printing Office, Washington, DC, Vol. 1, pp. 59–73.Barney, J.B. (1991) Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal of Management, 17(1), 99–120.Bourgeois, L. (1980) Strategy and environment: conceptual integration. Academy of Management Review, 5, 25–39.Brown, J.R., Dev, C.S. and Lee, D.J. (2000) Managing marketing channel opportunism: the efficacy of alternative governance mechanisms. Journal of Marketing, 64(2), 51–65.Carrillo, P.M., Robinson, H.S., Anumba, C.J. and Bouchlaghem, N.M. (2006) A knowledge transfer framework: the PFI context. Construction Management and Economics, 24(10), 1045–56.Chiles, T.H. and McMackin, J.F. (1996) Integrating variable risk preferences, trust, and transaction cost economics. Academy of Management Review, 21(1), 73–99. De Vaus, D.A. (2001) Research Design in Social Research, Sage, London.Dess, G. and Beard, D. (1984) Dimensions of organizational task environments. Administrative Science Quarterly, 29, 52–73.DFA (2005a) Public Private Partnerships: Guideline: Commonwealth Policy Principles for the Use of Private Financing: Business Case Development. Financial Management Guidance, Australian Department of Finance and Administration (DFA), Canberra, Australia.DFA (2005b) Public Private Partnerships: Guideline: Commonwealth Policy Principles for the Use of Private Financing: Risk Management. Financial Management Guidance, Australian Department of Finance andAdministration (DFA), Canberra, Australia.DFA (2005c) Public Private Partnerships: Guideline: Commonwealth Policy Principles for the Use of Private Financing: Introductory Guide. Financial Management Guidance, Australian Department of Finance andAdministration (DFA), Canberra, Australia.Doloi, H.K. and Jin, X.-H. (2007) Risk management in public–private partnership (PPP) projects from the project management perspective. Paper presented at the Construction Management and Economics 25th Anniversary Conference: Past, Present and Future, University of Reading, Reading, UK, 16–18 July.DTF (2000) Partnerships Victoria, Victorian Department of Treasury and Finance (DTF), Melbourne, Australia.Dwyer, F.R., Schurr, P.H. and Oh, S. (1987) Developing buyer–seller relationships. Journal of Marketing, 51(2), 11–27.Dyer, J.H. (1994) Dedicated assets: Japan’s manufacturing edge. Harvard Business Review, 72(6), 174–9.Dyer, J.H. (1996) Specialized supplier networks as a source of competitive advantage: evidence from the auto industry. Strategic Management Journal, 17(4), 271–91.Eisenberger, R., Fasolo, P. and Davis-LaMastro, V. (1990) Perceived organizational support and employee diligence, commitment, and innovation. Journal of Applied Psychology, 75, 51–9.Ethiraj, S.K., Kale, P., Krishnan, M.S. and Singh, J.V. (2005) Where do capabilities come from and how do they matter? A study in the software services industry. Strategic Management Journal, 26(1), 25–45.Faulkner, K. (2004) Public–private partnerships, in Ghobadian, A., Gallear, D., O’Regan, N. and Viney, H. (eds) Public–Private Partnerships: Policy and Experience, Palgrave Macmillan, Houndmills, England and New York, pp. 65–70.Foss, K. (1996) Knowledge-based approaches to the theory of the firm: some critical comments. Organization Science, 7(5), 470–6.Gouldner, A.W. (1960) The norm of reciprocity: a preliminary statement. American Sociological Review, 25, 161–79.Grant, R.M. (1991) The resource-based theory of competitive advantage: implications for strategy formulation. California Management Review, 33(3), 114–35.Gulati, R. (1995) Does familiarity breed trust? The implications of repeated ties for contractual choice in alliances. Academy of Management Journal, 38(1), 85–112.Han, S.H. and Diekmann, J. (2004) Judgment-based crossimpact method for predicting cost variance for highly uncertain projects. Journal of Construction Research, 5(2), 171–92.Hayford, O. (2006) Successfully allocating risk and negotiating a PPP contract. Paper presented at the 6th Annual National Public Private Partnerships Summit, Rydges Jamison, Sydney, Australia, 16–17 May.Heide, J.B. and Miner, A.S. (1992) The shadow of the future: effects of anticipated interaction and frequency of contact on buyer-seller cooperation. Academy of Management Journal, 35(2), 265–92.Helfat, C.E. and Peteraf, M.A. (2003) The dynamic resource-based view: capability lifecycles. Strategic Management Journal, 24(10), 997–1010.Holm, D.B., Eriksson, K. and Johanson, J. (1999) Creating value through mutual commitment to business network relationships. Strategic Management Journal, 20(5), 467–86.Jin, X.-H. (2007) A risk categorization framework for public– private partnership projects, in London, K., Thayarapan, G. and Chen, J. (eds) CIB Working Commissions W92 Built Environment Procurement International Conference–Interdisciplinarity and Multidisciplinary Intersections in Built Environment Procurement, University of Newcastle (eproceedings) Hunter Valley Gardens, NSW, Australia, 23–26 September, pp. 240–9.Jin, X.-H. and Doloi, H. (2007a) A conceptual risk-allocation framework for public–private partnership projects in Australia, in London, K., Thayarapan, G. and Chen, J. (eds) CIB Working Commissions W92 Built EnvironmentProcurement International Conference–Interdisciplinarity and Multidisciplinary Intersections in Built Environment Procurement, University of Newcastle (e-proceedings) Hunter Valley Gardens, NSW, Australia, 23–26 September, pp. 64–75.Jin, X.-H. and Doloi, H.K. (2007b) A theoretical framework for optimizing risk allocation and management in public– private partnership projects, in Xie, Y.-M. and Patnaikuni, I. (eds) The Fourth International Structural Engineering and Construction Conference (ISEC-4): Innovations in Structural Engineering and Construction, Park Hyatt Melbourne, Australia, 26–28 September, Vol. 2, Taylor & Francis Group, London, pp. 1495–500.Jin, X.-H. and Ling, F.Y.Y. (2005) Constructing a framework for building relationship and trust in project organizations: two case studies of building projects in China. Construction Management and Economics, 23(7), 685–96.Jin, X.-H. and Ling, F.Y.Y. (2006) Key relationship-based determinants of project performance in China. Building and Environment, 41(7), 915–25.Johnson, J.P., Korsgaard, M.A. and Sapienza, H.J. (2002) Perceived fairness, decision control, and commitment in international joint venture management teams. Strategic Management Journal, 23(12), 1141–60.Kale, P., Dyer, J.H. and Singh, H. (2002) Alliance capability, stock market response, and long-term alliance success: the role of the alliance function. Strategic Management Journal, 23(8), 747–67.Kangari, R. (1995) Risk management perceptions and trends of U.S. construction. ASCE Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 121(4), 422–9.Kim, S.M. and Mahoney, J.T. (2006) Mutual commitment to support exchange: relation-specific IT system as a substitute for managerial hierarchy. Strategic Management Journal, 27(5), 401–23.Koopmans, T. (1957) Three Essays on the State of Economic Science, McGraw-Hill, New York.Levine, D.M., Berenson, M.L. and Stephan, D. (2002) Statistics for Managers Using Microsoft Excel, 3rd edn, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.Li, B. and Akintoye, A. (2003) An overview of public–private partnership, in Akintoye, A., Beck, M. and Hardcastle, C. (eds) Public–Private Partnerships: Managing Risks and Opportunities, Blackwell Science, Malden, MA, pp. 3–30.Luo, Y. (2007) Are joint venture partners more opportunistic in a more volatile environment? Strategic Management Journal, 28(1), 39–60.Mahoney, J.T. (2001) A resource-based theory of sustainable rents. Journal of Management, 27, 651–60.Makadok, R. (2001) Toward a synthesis of the resourcebased and dynamic-capability views of rent creation. Strategic Management Journal, 22(5), 387–401.Miller, D. (1987) The structural and environmental correlates of business strategy. Strategic Management Journal, 8(1), 55–76.Milliken, F.J. (1987) Three types of perceived uncertainty about the environment: state, effect, and response uncertainty. Academy of Management Review, 12, 133–43.Mowday, R.T., Steers, R.M. and Porter, L.W. (1979) The measurement of organizational commitment. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 14, 224–47.Nelson, R.R. and Winter, S.G. (1982) An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change, Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.Nonaka, I. and Takeuchi, H. (1995) The Knowledge-Creating Company: How Japanese Companies Create the Dynamics of Innovation, Oxford University Press, New York.Parkhe, A. (1993) Strategic alliance structuring: a game theoretic and transaction costs examination of interfirm cooperation. Academy of Management Journal, 36, 794–829. Penrose, E.T. (1959) The Theory of the Growth of the Firm, Wiley, New York.Pisano, G. (1994) Knowledge, integration, and the locus of learning: an empirical analysis of process development. Strategic Management Journal, 15(3), 85–101.PMI (2001) A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide), Project ManagementInstitute, Newtown Square, PA.Rao, P.K. (2003) The Economics of Transaction Costs: Theory, Methods and Applications, Palgrave Macmillan, New York.Ren, H. (1994) Risk management: risk lifecycle and risk relationships on construction projects. International Journal of Project Management, 12(2), 68–74.Ring, P.S. and Van de Ven, A.H. (1994) Developmental processes of cooperative interorganizational relationships. Academy of Management Review, 19, 90–118.SAA (1998) AS/NZS 3931:1998: Risk Analysis of Technological Systems—Application Guide, Standards Association of Australia, Strathfield, NSW.Simon, H.A. (1961) Administrative Behavior, 2nd edn, Macmillan, New York.Tah, J.H.M. and Carr, V. (2000) A proposal for construction project risk assessment using fuzzy logic. Construction Management and Economics, 18(4), 491–500. Tan, W.C.K. (2004) Practical Research Methods, 2nd edn, Prentice Hall, Singapore.Thomas, A.V., Kalidindi, S.N. and Ananthanarayanan, K. (2003) Risk perception analysis of BOT road project participants in India. Construction Management and Economics, 21(4), 393–407.Thomas, A.V., Kalidindi, S.N. and Ganesh, L.S. (2006) Modelling and assessment of critical risks in BOT road projects. Construction Management and Economics, 24(4), 407–24.Thompson, P., and Perry, J.G. (eds) (1992) Engineering Construction Risks: A Guide to Project Risk Analysis and Risk Management, Implications for Project Clients and Project Managers, An SERC Project Report, Thomas Telford, London.Tiong, R.L.K. (1990) BOT projects: risks and securities. Construction Management and Economics, 8(3), 315–28.Tsoukalas, L.H. and Uhrig, R.E. (1997) Fuzzy and Neural Approaches in Engineering. Adaptive and Learning Systems for Signal Processing, Communications, and Control, John Wiley & Sons, Inc, New York.Uff, J. (1995) Risk, Management and Procurement in Construction, Centre of Construction Law and Management, London.Williamson, O.E. (1975) Markets and Hierarchies, Analysis and Antitrust Implications: A Study in the Economics of Internal Organization, Free Press, New York.Williamson, O.E. (1983) Credible commitments: using hostages to support exchange. American Economic Review, 73(4), 519–40.Williamson, O.E. (1985) The Economic Institutions of Capitalism: Firms, Markets, Relational Contracting, Free Press, New York.Williamson, O.E. (1991) Comparative economic organization: the analysis of discrete structural alternatives. Administrative Science Quarterly, 36(2), 269–96. Williamson, O.E. (1996) The Mechanisms of Governance, Oxford University Press, New York.Williamson, O.E. (1999) Strategy research: governance and competence perspectives. Strategic Management Journal, 20(12), 1087–108.Winter, S. (1988) Of Coase, competence and the corporation. Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 4, 181–97.Woodward, D.G. (1995) Use of sensitivity analysis in buildown-operate-transfer project evaluation. Journal of Project Management, 13(4), 239–46.World Bank (2008) Private Participation in Infrastructure (PPI) Project Database, available at http://ppi.worldbank.org (accessed February 2008).      708	Jin and Doloi  Interpreting risk allocation in PPP projects in a TCE perspective	709    