Interpersonal trust and inter‐firm trust in construction projectsEllen Lau & Steve RowlinsonTo cite this article: Ellen Lau & Steve Rowlinson (2009) Interpersonal trust and inter‐firm trust in construction projects, Construction Management and Economics, 27:6, 539-554, DOI:10.1080/01446190903003886To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/01446190903003886Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rcme20
Construction Management and Economics (June 2009) 27, 539–554Interpersonal trust and inter-firm trust in construction projectsELLEN LAU1* and STEVE ROWLINSON21Division of Building Science and Technology, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong2Department of Real Estate and Construction, University of Hong Kong, Hong KongReceived 7 August 2008; accepted 28 April 2009Working relationships are important in effecting project performance and cooperation is believed to be a behavioural consequence of trust. Trust, being a quality of relationships, involves people interacting at interpersonal and inter-firm levels. This is investigated through 10 partnering and non-partnering projects, using a validated trust scale. A case study approach is used to collect qualitative data through a quantitative approach to help understand the concept of trust. Data were collected from clients, contractors, consultants and subcontractors. Clients and contractors have a tendency to trust individuals whereas contractors and subcontractors have a tendency to trust firms. Inter-firm trust is better understood than interpersonal trust; but both are associated with keeping commitments and demonstrating cooperation, even though interpersonal trust is considered more important. Partnering does not necessarily exhibit more trust than non-partnering projects whereas clients and contractors have different emphasis on interpersonal and inter-firm trust. Therefore, to promote trusting relationships in multi-parties is to fulfil not only the technological and economical goals, but also the moral and social goals as expressed in people relationships such that a socially safe working place can be created. For this reason, middle managers need to know about trust because they face more relationship problems than others.Keywords: Interpersonal trust, inter-firm trust, relationship, partnering, project.IntroductionConstruction activities often involve uncertainty, exposure to high risk, the need for quick decisions, an orientation towards conflict and imperfect information. To bring together people with different professional backgrounds, different years of experience and different strengths to work together is never easy. Adversarial relationships and defensive behaviour tend to surface. Partnering in construction has been presented as a potentially important way of improving project performance through encouraging better integration and cooperation between contractual partners (Hong Kong Housing Authority, 2000). It is considered on the one hand as a platform for providing sustainability strategies (Matthews et al., 1996), and on the other, as a change in traditional relationships to a shared culture without regard to organizational boundaries (CII, 1989). Thequestion is what is to change and what should be done to change. Given the view of the ‘new’ relationship described in partnering as being based on trust, dedicated to common goals, and understanding of each other’s individual expectations andvalues,we investigate trustasarelationshipatinter-firmlevelandinterpersonal level and attempt to review whether partnering projects display more trust than non-partnering projects.Quality of relationshipRelationships are generally described as good or bad, positive or negative, close (intimate) or distant (nonintimate) and, for functionally based relationships, task-oriented or non-task-oriented. This shows that the quality of a relationship falls into one of two extremes and only a continuum is able to reflect its intensity. Trust is regarded as a quality of relationship that can have an impact on project performance. A*Author for correspondence. E-mail: bsellenl@cityu.edu.hkgood	interpersonal	relationship	involves trust andConstruction Management and EconomicsISSN 0144-6193 print/ISSN 1466-433X online # 2009 Taylor & Francis http://www.informaworld.comDOI: 10.1080/01446190903003886
confidence in others (Duck, 1990). It has the characteristics of enjoyment, trust, mutual assistance, respect and understanding, like those of a friendship. The other extreme of trust is ‘distrust’ whereas the middle of the continuum is a neutral position that we can refer to as ‘no trust’. Trust at work involves a task to accomplish. Getting the work done involves others and this demands cooperation to have the task accomplished. Bolton and Bolton (1996) describe the keys to good relationships at work as respect, fairness and honesty without considering the ‘friendship’ element in the relationships. Respect is essential to building constructive and ongoing relationships, but it may have nothing to do with competence or incompetence because it can be affected by manners or cultural norms. Fairness relates to how people are treated and concerns justice in the distribution of rewards. However, it is difficult to achieve absolute fairness, and generally, a mutually beneficial outcome is desirable in most cases, particularly in business dealings. Regarding honesty, Bolton and Bolton (1996, p. 116) state that ‘True honesty is not something that comes easily. It is a rigorous moral achievement’ and it takes time to assure oneself whether the other is honest. Williams (2001) suggests that people’s perception of others’ ability, benevolence and integrity would determine the others’ trustworthiness. In all task-focused relationships, task-related rules are endorsed more strongly than interpersonal rules (Argyle and Henderson, 1985; Anderson and Narus, 1990) except for some universal rules such as respect for privacy, public criticism and debt repayment or returning favours. Although task-focused relationships also involve interpersonal exchange, task rules are rewards-oriented and the goal of the relationship is primarily to cooperate in the production of a discrete product or service.Interpersonal trust and inter-firm trustTrust at an individual level has a dyadic relationship. Two persons who have worked together before and have knowledge about each other may or may not have interpersonal trust. The attributes of interpersonal relationships are communicated to fulfil a variety of functions, such as to explain, justify or excuse behaviour, as well as to assign blame and instil guilt (Hogg and Vaughan, 2002). Effective communication can sustain good relationships. Through communication, uncertainty is eliminated or minimized within a comfort zone where people can talk, negotiate and compromize such that the relationship would not be ruined. The resultant behavioural outcome is that the party will exercise cooperative or collaborative behaviour when trust is present. If this does not happen, then distrust will be present and conflict arises. When people have no intention to cooperate, compromize or come to any agreement, only certain external forces or influence will help to remove or minimize the effect of conflict situations, which may lead to deadlock, thirdparty intervention or even litigation where a ruling or regulatory regime has to be strictly followed. In a global society the probability of working with strangers increases. Trusting people begins with trusting ourselves (Solomon and Flores, 2001). While building trust may take many transactions, and many commitments and expectations fulfilled, and in the absence of personal history and relationships, we are relying on reputation, in the form of institutional trust. So whom we can trust, the firm or the person? A firm, in effect a wholly constituted institution, run and moved by individuals and collective human actions and decisions, is about the evasiveness of the question of responsibility. Block (1987) points out that problems would surface if we take a bureaucratic mentality not to take responsibility for what is happening. A firm, governed by a control mechanism in predicting behaviour, involves human relationships. It requires negotiating agreement or negotiating trust in the process because there is interdependence. Negotiating trust as viewed by Block is an act of eliminating bureaucracy, while interpersonal trust somehow falls in between the two, the firm and the individual. Based on the temporary nature of projects, the work itself becomes a one-off experience and there is no bond to encourage these people to work together again in the future. The benefit of the learning process is lost and a new relationship needs to be cultivated again in a new project. This is similar to ‘swift trust’ in a temporary system where there is little interpersonal exchange and the focus is more on action (Meyerson et al., 1996) because a longterm relationship is not expected.  The guiding principle for organizational relationships is the maintenance of the interdependence of the two parties’ goals (Blois, 1998). Exchange theory has been used to explain business or trading relationships. It states that people will stay in a relationship if the balance of rewards and costs is as good as they think they can get from the various alternatives open to them, making allowances for the costs of making the change (Argyle and Henderson, 1985). Work relations between firms are affected by the supports and restraints of the working environment, and they require incentives to sustain working relationships. If we contend that positive relationships will bring health and happiness, good work relations will do the same.  Inter-firm relationships can be established through strategic alliances and partnering. There exists a formal agreement to put two or more firms together to work jointly for a purpose, at the project or business level, depending on the content of the agreement. Strategic alliances are voluntary cooperative inter-firm agreements aimed at achieving competitive advantage for the partners (Gulati, 1998; Das and Teng, 2000), whereas partnering is a relationship-based agreement dedicated to common goals and an understanding of each other’s individual expectation and values (CII, 1989). Trust is emphasized in both cases to ensure the partnership functions effectively and efficiently. This requires effective interaction at a working level among many people with diversified expertise and interests. An interfirm relationship may also exist at an informal level where no formal agreement is made. This is where a high degree of trust can normally be found. The relationship there is usually strongly embedded with personal trust among the decision-makers or key persons of the firms. This kind of trust is usually subtle and unspoken. It also reflects the behavioural pattern of the stakeholders and can be called goodwill. In referring to the relationship between the main contractor and specialist trade contractors, Sozen and Kayahan (2001) suggest that goodwill is the most effective and least costly means of safeguarding exchange and enhancing performance. Powell (1992, p. 393) in his paper, ‘Conflict in the context of education in building ethics’, states that ‘Trust pertains to relationship, the future, confidence, morality and mutuality’. As the ability to be trustworthy and to trust is essential to building human relationships, a relationship exchange is implicit. It goes upward or horizontally to the actors who have the power of reward or influence in the exchange of trust (Figure1).The cultural aspect of interpersonal trust and inter-firm trustAn individual is invariably influenced by the national culture and subsequently the task culture in his/her working environment. Trust is viewed as an integrative component enabling a short-term perspective to become viable for the long term, and the long-term orientation is also regarded as a cultural factor (Hofstede, 2001). Trustworthiness is a predominant feature of Chinese–Chinese business transactions. A survey about Chinese culture and partnering conducted by Kwan and Ofori (2001) shows that trust and friendship as well as mutuality and respect to be important values that affect contractors’ business relationship with others. Chinese tradition emphasizes harmonious relationships among stakeholders.  ‘Trust’ is a word known by all and is a term with many meanings (Williamson, 1993). It can have theFigure 1	Relationship and trust related to a contractormeaning of belief, confidence and integrity in a personal sense, while denoting reputation, credibility and the ability to keep promises in a functional sense, which can apply to both an individual and a firm. Lun Yu (論語) states that ‘信近於義’, which means that its definition is close to that of integrity. Therefore, trust in the Chinese context can be referred to as ‘誠信’, which includes also the meaning of trustworthiness and compliance. 信, 信任, 相信 are the usual ways of expressing trust, like in the context of ‘I trust you’, ‘can you be trusted’, with an implication that there is a reliance on one another, where one is vulnerable and at risk if the other does not perform. This implies ‘interdependence’ like that described by Axelrod in respect of cooperation (1984, 1997). Since the research was carried out in Hong Kong, both English and Chinese terms were used to catch the meaning of the term to differentiate the nature of trust. In Chinese, trust is one of the five tenets of Confucianism and as a single character it can be ‘信: 誠也; 相信, 信任’; and as part of other words as in the ‘terms’ like 信任 (trust, confidence), 信用 (credibility), 信譽 (reputation), 信守 (abide by, keep a promise), 誠信 (integrity), and 信賴 (trustworthy, reliable), has similar meanings and would form the bases of trust in defining interpersonal trust and inter-firm trust.  The general distinction of interpersonal trust and inter-firm trust in the author’s pilot study1 (Lau, 2005) demonstrates that interpersonal trust emphasizes integrity and reliability whereas inter-firm trust emphasizes credibility and reputation. They are interrelated but one is not dependent on the other. For interpersonal trust, integrity (誠信) generally refers to an individual quality, and in Chinese it signifies honesty and confidence, and thus no cheating should be involved in the action responding to a situation involving perceived benefits. Integrity therefore gives rise to an ethical expectation from others, and trusting a person with integrity means that his/her actions are consistent with their words (Shaw, 1997). Reliability (信賴) refers to what can be trusted, and reflects the notion of reliance in expressing complete confidence, like that of credibility; but when there is no choice, reliance becomes dependence (Hart, 1988). Regarding interfirm trust, credibility (信用) means the ability of a firm to fulfil its obligations and commitments, and is therefore an expression of complete confidence in someone to perform and achieve results (Shaw, 1997). Reputation (信譽) is normally regarded as a positive attribute dependent on a firm’s past behaviour (Wilson, 1995). It encourages commitment to future business transactions. Barney and Hansen (1994) consider reputation to be a signal that indicates a strong form of trust and an asset in which firms are willing to invest by engaging in trustworthy behaviour (Wilson, 1995; Chiles and McMackin, 1996), it is sometimes extended to mean that business partners are perceived to be in compliance with the norms of equity after transactions are completed (Ring and Van de Ven, 1992).  Trust in Chinese society is generally believed to be built on reputation and relationship (Cheng and Pang, 2003). Relationship is traditionally understood as interpersonal, starting in the family and extended to ‘friends’ and others. The relationship structure is therefore an important mechanism for building trust. Reputation is considered impersonal and one will have to rely on reputation if there is no knowledge of the others.Trust in the context of partnering projects‘Trust’ has been included in the literature of different disciplines and in construction partnering or strategic alliance frameworks (Rowlinson and Root, 1997; Bresen and Marshall, 2000; Kwan and Ofori, 2001; Liu and Fellows, 2001; Swan et al., 2002). The tangible benefits of partnering are a reduction in the number of disputes, a reduction in the value of claims, time savings, cost savings and improvement in quality, whereas the non-tangible benefits are harmony at work and good working relationships. This mindset stipulates that the trust relationship in partnering is mainly a form of inter-firm trust that calls for cooperation and collaboration (Ring and Van De Ven, 1992; Dyer and Chu, 1997). In Hong Kong, partnering is contractorled. The partnering arrangement is first initiated as a marketing tool for building relationships, but is then used as a bridging stone for establishing long-term relationships and a ‘management tool’ in the production process. If a partnering agreement is incorporated in the contract, then an attempt is made to create a working relationship in which knowledge-based trust can be built. Repeated transactions in the form of further contracts then help to sustain a long-term relationship (Fontenot and Wilson, 1997). Knowledgebased trust allows the client to predict the contractor’s behaviour and to make quicker decision in choosing a contractor aside from budgetary criteria.  Trust is essential in contracting, and the question is: ‘Does partnering bring inter-firm trust, and if so, how can we test the existence of trust and determine the trust level?’ Four factors are considered here for interfirm trust: keeping commitments; predictability and knowledge of others; honest negotiations; and avoiding taking excessive advantage (Rempel and Holmes, 1986; Cummings and Bromiley, 1996).Trust demands keeping commitmentsIn searching for a mutual objective, partners have to explain their reasonable expectation (Bennett and Jayes, 1998) and expectation is one of the components of trust relations. With a committed workforce, it is possible to acquire benefits such as increased opportunity for innovation and the continuous improvement of quality products and services (CII, 1989).Trust involves predictability and knowledge about othersBennett and Jayes (1996, p. 12) state that: ‘You should mainly partner with people that you have worked with before or people who have had experience with partnering’. The benefit of doing so is an improved understanding leading to improved productivity arising from designers, managers and clients having worked together for several years. This has been identified in EPSRC research which shows productivity improvements that range from 50% to 200% (Bennett and Jayes, 1996, p. 13). Knowledge of members increases predictability and reduces uncertainty.Trust demands honest negotiationsOpen book arrangements, under which confidential information is made available to other stakeholders, demand trust between partners or even among partnering firms. Only commitment from the top management can make this possible and bring successful implementation of partnering. The findings so far indicate that a saving in project costs can be up to 10% of total cost for project partnering; and for strategic partnering, the saving is expected to be up to 30% (Bennett and Jayes, 1998).Trust means to avoid taking excessive advantagePartnership creates a relationship that is expected to yield a higher standard of conduct, and is not just a purely conventional construction contract where only commercial issues are addressed. In addition, a partnership contract also touches on the conduct or ‘trust’ expected to be embedded in a commercial relationship rather than just spelling out the main issues of payment and how to tackle problems when they arise. In law, this conduct is known as a fiduciary duty, which is a trust relationship between a trustor and a trustee.  The contract is regarded as a hard fact. It describes how the relevant parties should work in relation to procedures and the action to be taken when certain problems arise. In other words, it tells one how to behave. The business and legal relationships created begin and end in calculus-based trust (Lewicki and Bunker, 1996). It prescribes ‘punishment’ for a party who does not conform to the terms of the contract. Behavioural consistency is sustained by the threat of ‘punishment’.  However, interpersonal trust should not be disregarded in a partnering context. Dyer and Chu (1997) suggested that institutional environment had an important influence on the development of inter-firm trust. They believed that personal ties are also important in inter-firm relationships while inter-organizational routines are credible signals of commitment if one has confidence in the stability of the firm’s routines and personnel. They believed that inter-firm trust cannot be created by individuals acting on their own; and individual actions are a starting mechanism for interfirm trust if these individuals can influence organization-wide processes and routines.  Levels of trust may generally be described as high, medium and low. There is no universal agreement as to what constitutes a high or low level of trust. As interpersonal trust is generally expressed in terms of whether the other is reliable (Rotter, 1967), a high level of trust is believed to be anchored on the positive conclusions about the other’s motive drawn from past experience and by faith in what the future holds. This implies that one is unlikely to call the other’s motives into question in a conflict situation. A medium level of trust in a relationship thus refers to a situation when there is some uncertainty about the other’s intentions, and one is alert for signs of risk. It is likely that manipulative and coercive power tactics are used in a conflict situation when a medium level of trust exists, and more stringent criteria are adopted to evaluate the other’s motives. This is a form of risk-avoidant strategy to fill the gap of uncertainty. With a low level of trust, there is hardly any confidence and people tend to be sceptical, while little care is shown in the relationship. The level of trust is usually used to evaluate the extent of trust prevalent in a particular setting. Shaw (1997) provides a scoring system to measure trust in organizational management to widen the margin among people. Although this is an arguable approach if all people are involved, it yet provides an indication of the intensity of trust. According to Kao and Ng (1992), a high level of trust implies that one is confident and psychologically secure as well as more relaxed, less suspicious and defensive about the organization one has chosen to trust. One example of a high level of trust is the Japanese system of lifetime employment, which offers a secure working environment. The Chinese family business also retains a high level of trust among members of in-groups and offers another example of personal trust. When a business is exposed to high risk and uncertainty, a high level of trust is required so that the organization concerned can be less hierarchical and more flexible in responding to change. When the environment is more stable and the organization is more in control, a comparatively low level of trust is required. In mechanized production, where trust is built into the control procedures, little personal trust is required and therefore reliance on personal trust is minimized. In automated production, where people are required to be responsive and adaptive, a higher level of trust is required. This indicates that different degrees of trust may be required in different situations, different working environments or even different industries. Fukuyama (1995), on the other hand, argues that the level of trust in a society differs among nations because of the different cultures.  Inter-firm trust is expressed generally in terms of the confidence over what is expected from the other firm (Das and Teng, 1998; Gulati, 1998). Goodwill is normally regarded as a high level of trust; credibility and reputation (knowledge of others) possibly form the other levels of trust. Yamagishi and Yamagishi (1994) claimed that knowledge-based trust is simply a by-product of close and stable relations, and is conceptually distinct from assurance, which is believed to be a risk-free relationship where the other’s cooperation is warranted. This study is therefore also directed to determine the different levels of interpersonal trust and inter-firm trust to reflect the intensity of trust.The research case studyThe case studies reported here focused on interpersonal trust and inter-firm trust in the relationship channels using:(1) structured questionnaires to evaluate interpersonal trust and inter-firm trust with validated trust scales to determine the trust status at interpersonal and inter-firm levels;(2) structured questionnaires to elaborate the meanings of interpersonal trust and inter-firm trust as understood by the practitioners in a project environment.  The questionnaires were so designed to determine the level of interpersonal and inter-firm trust in partnering and non-partnering projects with a scoring system. The scoring system was adopted from the trust scale validated by researchers in organizational behaviour and psychology such as Rotter (1967), Cummings and Bromiley (1996) with a general understanding that the level of interpersonal trust was a measure of whether one’s expectation of others could be met; whereas the level of inter-firm trust was about the desirable behaviour expected of one another in the relationship channels.  Ten projects, some partnering and some nonpartnering, were selected for case studies to obtain a  balanced view of trust as it had been assumed that trust might still exist where there was no partnering. Data were collected from the key participants of each project from the client, the consultant, the contractor and the subcontractor firms. Forty responses were collected, representing a response rate of 50%. Seven of the projects incorporated partnering whereas the other three were non-partnering (see Table1).Scale used to measure trustInterpersonal trustThe Interpersonal Trust Scale was based on Rotter’s work in 1967 and 1971. It had been widely adopted for use as it specifies both the theoretical and operational definitions of the term. The scale was designed in aTable 1	Case study research projectsLikert scale of 1 to 7 to measure one’s expectation that the behaviour, promises or statements (verbal or written) of other individuals can be relied upon (Wrightsman, 1991).Inter-firm trustThe Inter-firm Trust Scale was based on Cummings and Bromiley’s (1996) instrument in a Likert scale of 1 to 7 to measure inter-organizational trust from the behavioural perspective in terms of keeping commitments, negotiating honestly and avoiding taking excessive advantage, where their empirical studies had proved that these behavioural statements were quite highly correlated to the three dimensions of trust— affective, cognitive and behavioural intention. Six questions adapted from Rempel and Holmes’ trust scale (1986) were added to test the predictability of the behaviour of a partnering firm in reflecting knowledgebased trust.Result of the trust scoreThe results were analysed with descriptive statistical methods and the relative importance index. There were 25 questions each to measure the level of interpersonal trust and inter-firm trust, with a maximum score 175 and a minimum score of 25. The highest interpersonal trust scores (ranging from 102 to 107) were found in Project No.8, a non-partnering project with a public client. It seemed that participants showed high interpersonal trust owing to its openness of information, accountability on procedural matters and its commitment to payment. It might also be due to the fact that only clients and consultants were involved in providing responses for this project. Project No.2, a partnering project with a corporate client, had very balanced trust scores (ranging from 87 to 89) and this suggested that the participants had been working in a task manner.
ProjectProject titleCharacteristicClientCase 1Residential buildingPartneringPublicCase 2Facility buildingPartneringPrivateCase 3Industrial buildingPartneringCorporate*Case 4Commercial buildingPartneringPrivateCase 5RefurbishmentNon-partneringPublicCase 6Residential building complexPartneringPublicCase 7RefurbishmentNon-partneringCorporate*Case 8Civil engineeringNon-partneringCorporate*Case 9Residential building complexPartneringPrivateCase 10Civil engineeringPartneringCorporate*Note: *A corporate client refers to an institutional client who has accountability to the government and yet operates on its own.Table 2	Interpersonal trust scores for research projectsProj.No.CharacteristicsClientIndividual scores for interpersonal trustRange of scoresAverage scorePercentage w.r.t. the maximum score1PartneringPrivate80, 83, 8880–888448%2PartneringCorporate87, 88, 89, 8987–998850%3PartneringPrivate58, 79, 84, 9858–988046%4PartneringPrivate84, 84, 86, 10284–1028951%5Non-partneringCorporate51, 84, 88, 97, 10751–1078549%6Non-partneringCorporate78, 9778–978850%7PartneringCorporate73, 80, 84, 85, 86, 90, 9073–908448%8Non-partneringPublic102, 103, 107102–10710459%9PartneringPublic83, 87, 94, 9783–979051%10PartneringPublic84, 85, 87, 11184–1119253%
The lowest interpersonal trust scoring ranges were found in Project No.3, a partnering project with private clients. The highest scores (102 and above) of interpersonal trust came from two clients, three consultants and one contractor; while the lowest trust scores (51 and below) came from two contractors. This suggested that contractors might be more ‘guarded’ in their trust as a result of the commercial nature of the project and that they placed more emphasis on financial commitment to the work.  The respondents had higher inter-firm trust scores on keeping commitments and predictability, and comparatively lower scores for negotiating honestly and avoiding taking excessive advantage (Table3). Comparing the scores of inter-firm trust with interpersonal trust, they generally had higher inter-firm trust (average mean score 104) than interpersonal trust (average mean score 88). This might be because the questions for inter-firm trust were more situational specific, whereas the questions for interpersonal trust were generally focused on testing whether the other was reliable. In addition, there was an implication that evaluating inter-firm trust was less complex than evaluating interpersonal trust in which psychological Table 3a Inter-firm trust scores for research projects aspects predominate with respect to issues like culture and demographic factors.  Comparing the interpersonal trust scores of different participants in the project team (see Table4), it was found that client and consultant as a group; client have higher interpersonal trust scores than contractor and subcontractor, as a group, contractor. This means that client and consultant tend to trust the individuals. In view of the inter-firm trust, contractor scores the highest and consultant scores the lowest, whereas the scores for client and consultant are more or less the same. This indicates that the client group would trust the individual rather than the firm, whereas contractor group would trust the firm rather than the individual.Proj.No.Project typesCharacteristicsClientInter-per. mean	Inter-firm trust mean scoretrust scoreMean scoreKCNHAAPD1BuildingPartneringPrivate84102262622242BuildingPartneringCorporate88110282427273BuildingPartneringPrivate80104262525244BuildingPartneringPrivate89106282423275RefurbishmentNon-partneringCorporate85106272425256BuildingNon-partneringCorporate88107262725267RefurbishmentPartneringCorporate84100262322258InfrastructureNon-partneringPublic104104272325249BuildingPartneringPublic90962721192510InfrastructurePartneringPublic9210428222228Notes: * The scores for NH have been adjusted to obtain a direct comparison with other scores. KC, NH, AA, PD: see Table3b.  In an overview, client maintains an equal importance for interpersonal trust and inter-firm trust, while subcontractor maintains a comparatively low interpersonal trust and a comparatively high inter-firm trust. In view of 22 clients (including consultants) and 18 contractors (including subcontractors) in the respondents, it can be observed from Table3a that collectively clients have higher interpersonal trust whereas contractors have higher inter-firm trust.Table 3b	Inter-firm trust scoresSubscales for inter-firm trustAverage scoreKeep commitments (KC)111Predictability (PD)106Negotiate honestly (NH)99Avoid taking excessive advantage (AA)98Overall mean104Meaning of interpersonal trust and interfirm trustRespondents were asked similar questions regarding the basis for interpersonal and inter-firm trust. These questions were designed to identify the characteristics or components of the two different types of trust. The relative importance index (RII) in Table5 and Table6 showed that cooperation, commitment and a positive relationship were important for both interpersonal and inter-firm trust. The other items regarded as important for interpersonal trust included experience, face-to-face communication and integrity. This meant that interpersonal trust needed direct contact and communication and not just frequent interaction and a long working relationship. Direct contact was required for interpersonal trust but not quite so for inter-firm trust. The RII was low for both interpersonal and inter-firm trust in situations where one has to refer to a third party or other sources for information (0.569 and 0.544); one has to depend on another (0.546 and 0.558); and when others exercise control (0.564 and 0.553). It appeared that the respondents were cautious about the sources of information and would prefer to have knowledge of others through personal contact, direct experience and communication. It indicated that inter-firm trust could have been considered to be more objective as it was mostly based on information about the other firm, which was a form of knowledge-based trust. Reward and punishment were ranked very low in the RII for both interpersonal and inter-firm trust, and this implied that these were the lowest form of trust, reflecting actions based on compliance rather than relationships.  In inter-firm trust, behavioural consequence in the form of cooperation was more important than a positive relationship. In interpersonal trust, on the other hand, a positive relationship was regarded as more important than cooperation. To distinguish such outcome it is prudent to explain the antecedent of cooperation. Cooperation can be viewed from the transaction exchange theory and the social exchange theory. In transaction economics, an obvious stimulus for cooperation is the availability of economic rewards, with the consideration that perceived benefits equal and exceed its cost. Therefore the presence of a mechanism to curb opportunism is important from the economic perspective. When cooperation is derived not from external awards or other perceived benefits, it is of sociopsychological nature, with the antecedent of interdependence (Phua, 2004). Cooperation, being considered beyond economic benefits, is largely social in context. To maintain a relationship means that the interests of all parties involved in the relationship are to be served (Lau, 2005). This makes clear that the
Table 4	Scores for interpersonal trust and inter-firm trust of the project membersInterpersonal trustInter-firm trustClientConsultantContractorSubcontractorClientConsultantContractorSubcontractor73785179869590858080588491969091848383889399921038486849097100931068586849099100101116858884107102103978887108102103978987109103103107948711011210410710289111113105103971151231119812012410212489.9090.6683.9286.20101.1095.33104.23100.20Average for clientsAverage for contractorsAverage for clientsAverage for contractors908598102Note: The bold numbers indicate excessively high and low scores.Table 5	Relative importance of interpersonal trustBasis of interpersonal trustTotal scoreMeanRelative imp.indexYour experience of working with the other person1543.9490.790The commitments demonstrated by the other person1493.8210.764The positive relationship you have already built with the other person1483.7950.759The cooperation demonstrated by the other person1453.7180.744The integrity within the person1453.7180.744The willingness to cooperate with the other person1393.6580.732Face-to-face communication you have with the other person1383.5390.708The agreement (mostly verbal) that you have with the other person1313.4470.689Your knowledge of the other person1323.3850.677The length of time you have been working with the other person1243.1800.636The frequency of interaction with the other person1233.1540.631The action that the other person has taken1223.1280.626Your general impression of the other person1193.0510.610The value-added service provided by the other person1193.0510.610The balance of risk with the other person1152.9490.590The way the other person works1122.9470.589What you have learnt about him/her from sources you can trust1112.8460.569Your knowledge of the third party who can influence the other person1102.8210.564The control you can exercise over the other person1102.8210.564The dependence of the other person1012.7300.546The other person’s general public image1032.6410.528What you have learnt about the other person from a third party that you trust982.5130.503The reward and/or punishment given to the other person982.5130.503Note: The bold text distinguishes data in the high range (0.70–1.00)—medium (or average) range (0.590–0.699)—low range (0–0.589).
interpersonal and inter-firm relationships have different emphases.  The RII showed that interpersonal trust was either more important or more obvious than inter-firm trust (with the highest RII being 0.790 for interpersonal trust vs 0.749 for inter-firm trust), but the lowest RII for both were relatively equal (with the lowest RII being 0.503 for interpersonal trust vs 0.513 for inter-firm trust). Table7 presents an indicative level of the different types of trust with respect to the RII in three groups ascribed as high, moderate and low levels of trust (high50.7 and above; moderate50.590–0.699; low50.500–0.589; and no trust at 0.499 and below). These ranges were assigned to reflect a comparable level of importance for both interpersonal trust and inter-firm trust for easy reference in the later discussion.Bases of interpersonal trust and inter-firm trustRespondents were firstly asked to weigh the relative importance of interpersonal trust and inter-firm trust in a scale of 1 to 9. The result indicates that interpersonal trust has a weighting of 0.67 and inter-firm trust a weighting of 0.33, two times higher than inter-firm trust. Respondents were then asked to rate on a scale of 1 to 7 the terms that best describe interpersonal trust and inter-firm trust. The same six terms with one more term following the ranking order for interpersonal and inter-firm trust confirmed in the authors’ pilot study were used in this study to explore the specific components of trust. Analysed by frequency method, the different terms of interpersonal and inter-firm trust have an overall mean above 4 (maximum55) except for ‘reputation’ as related to interpersonal trust, as indicated in the present study in Table8b, which has a mean of 3.7. This means that the respondents agree that these terms are significant2 (Lau, 2005) but are somewhat reserved about ‘reputation’ in interpersonal trust. However, the added component ‘faith’ (confidence and faith, 信心), which extends the meaning of trust to a positive attitude to an uncertain future, has received some emphasis with inter-firm trust and in nonpartnering projects. This suggests that a subject is willing to make a commitment in the absence of full knowledge under these circumstances. Table8 indicates the ranking order and the brief meanings of these terms, as a whole and as in partnering and nonpartnering projects. As a whole (see Tables8a and 8b), the order of these terms was more or less the same, but different orders were observed for partnering and non-partnering projects. For interpersonal trustTable 6	Relative importance of inter-firm trustBasis of inter-firm trustTotal scoreMeanRelative imp.indexThe cooperation demonstrated by the other firm1463.7440.749The positive relationship you have built with the other firm1463.7440.749The commitments demonstrated by the other firm1443.6920.738The other firm’s willingness to cooperate1333.5000.700Your experience of working with the other firm1333.4100.682Your knowledge of the leading person or the leading group of the other firm1333.4100.682Face-to-face communication you have had with the people of the other firm1323.3850.677The length of time you have been working with the other firm1213.1840.637The frequency of interaction with the people of the other firm1203.1580.632The cohesiveness shown by the other firm’s workforce1223.1280.626The balance of risk with the other firm1193.0510.610The product that the other firm produces1173.0000.600Your general impression of the other firm1162.9740.595The value-added service provided by the other firm1162.9740.595The contract you have with the other firm1162.9740.595Your knowledge of most of the people of the other firm1132.9740.595The set rules and procedures implemented by the other firm1132.8970.579The general public image or brand name projected by the other firm1122.8720.574The dependence of the other firm1062.7900.558The control you can exercise over the other firm1052.7630.553What you have learnt from sources you can trust1062.7180.544The reward and/or punishment given to the other firm1002.5640.513What you have learnt about the other firm from a person that you trust1002.5640.513Note: The bold text distinguishes data in the high range (0.70–1.00)—medium (or average) range (0.590–0.699)—low range (0–0.589).in partnering projects, it could be observed that it was about a person who had integrity and kept promises, whereas it was not quite so with non-partnering projects. Interpersonal trust in non-partnering projects is similar to our conventional concept of inter-firm trust: credibility and reputation. This suggests that the conventional wisdom about trust—hat the firm is not separated from the person—has been maintained in non-partnering projects. For inter-firm trust in partnering projects, it could be observed that credibility was ranked top and confidence was ranked low, whereas it was quite the opposite in non-partnering projects. This suggests that the respondents working with nonpartnering projects are more willing to accept risk from the firm and will rely on the trustworthiness of the person, whereas people working with partnering projects tend to rely on the ‘integrity’ of the person and the firm.Discussion on the meaning of interpersonal trust and inter-firm trustAccording to Table7, high levels of interpersonal and inter-firm trust display two specific behaviours, cooperation and keeping commitments. This generally echoes the literature on trust about behavioural outcome. Low levels of interpersonal and inter-firm trust display control and dependence, and are believed to be common for any project organization. When it comes to implementation, some people in the supervisory or monitoring role tend to follow the rules and procedures for strict compliance and forget about the empowerment in their hands, while some are blamed for action without proper empowerment. This leaves a gap in the process where one may have misinterpreted interdependence and dependence between top management and middle management and between middle management and the operation line. The problem will be amplified if the project/institution becomes bigger and more complex and when more parties are involved. It is believed that this gap can only be filled by external rewards, relationship and shared activities (Argyle, 1991). Reputation, as shown in Tables5 and 6 for interpersonal and inter-firm trust, is taken as a low level trust; it is therefore contended that trust in most people’s minds, is personal-based, as described by Solomon and Flores (2001) and Block (1987).  The terms in Table8 confirms the result of the RII analysis of the meanings of trust. To draw connections for the meanings of interpersonal trust and inter-firmTable 7	Indicative level of interpersonal trust and inter-firm trustInterpersonal trustInter-firm trustLevel of importanceExperience with othersDemonstrate cooperationHighKeeping commitmentsWillingness to cooperate(RII 0.700–1.000)Have positive relationshipPositive relationshipDemonstrating cooperation or willingness to cooperateIntegrity within the personFace-to-face communicationKeeping commitmentsAgreementExperience with othersModerateKnowledge of the other personKnowledge of the key person(RII 0.590–0.699)Length of time spent working togetherFace-to-face communicationFrequency of interactionLength of time spent working togetherAction takenFrequency of interactionGeneral impressionDemonstrate cohesive workforceValue-added service providedBalance of riskBalance of riskQuality of product/serviceGeneral reputationValue-added service providedContractKnowledge of people of the other firmHow the other worksSet rules and procedures (how the other works)Low(RII 0.500–0.589)Learn about the other from a third party or other sourcesLearn about the other from a third party or other sourcesControl existsControl existsDependence existsDependence existsGeneral reputationGeneral reputationReward and punishment existReward and punishment existTable 8	Bases of interpersonal trust and inter-firm trustBrief meanings of trust(1) Integrity (誠信 sing sun) relates to ethical issues.(2) Credibility (信用 sun yung) means the behaviour of a firm to fulfil its obligations and commitments.(3) Trust with confidence (信任 sun yan) relates to trusting a person on the moral side.(4) Reputation (信譽 sun yuh) is normally regarded as a positive attribute ascribed to a firm based on its past behaviour.(5) Confidence with and faith (信心 sun sam) constitute positive expectation vested with a person (self) for another person or for an object/event (others), where there is some knowledge base.(6) Trustworthy, reliable (信賴 sun laai) refers to what can be trusted, and reflects the notion of reliance, expressing complete confidence.(7) Abide by, keep a promise (信守 sun sau) has the meaning of binding oneself under a particular constraint for the future (Jackson, 1992).trust at high levels of relative importance to the bases of trust is basically an induction exercise like that of a business research. The purpose is to obtain evidence from the real world to explain a particular phenomenon (Sekeran, 1992; Ghauri, 2002). It therefore follows that interpersonal trust comprises ‘integrity’, ‘confidence’, ‘faith’, ‘reliability’ and ‘keeping promises’, while inter-firm trust has the components of ‘credibility’, ‘reputation’, ‘confidence’ and ‘keeping promises’.Discussion of the insights gained from partnering and non-partnering projectsDrawing the different research results together with the project particulars enables an insightful explanation for trust relationships. In view of the trust scores obtained from the project cases if high trust is described as 101 to 175, medium trust 76 to 100 and low trust as 25 to 75, there is no indication that interpersonal trust and inter-firm trust are higher in partnering projects.Table 8a	Order of the bases of interpersonal trust and inter-firm trust in the pilot study (Lau, 2005)Ranking	Trust in firm-to-firm relations	Trust in person-to-person relations123456信任信用信譽信守誠信信賴Trust with confidenceCredibilityReputationAbide by, keep a promiseIntegrityTrustworthy, reliable信任誠信信賴信守信用 N/ATrust with confidenceIntegrityTrustworthy, reliableAbide by, keep a promiseCredibilityTable 8bOrder of the bases of interpersonal trust and inter-firm trustRankingInterpersonal trustInter-firm trust1信守Abide by, keep a promise信用Credibility2信任Trust with confidence信賴Trustworthy, reliable3信用Credibility誠信Integrity4誠信Integrity信守Abide by, keep a promise5信賴Trustworthy, reliable信心Confidence with faith6信心Confidence with faith信任Trust with confidence7信譽Reputation信譽ReputationTable 8cOrder of the bases of interpersonal trust for partnering and non-partnering projectsRanking	Interpersonal trust for partnering	Interpersonal trust for non-partnering1信守Abide by, keep a promise信譽Reputation2誠信Integrity信用Credibility3信任Trust with confidence信守Abide by, keep a promise4信賴Trustworthy, reliable信心Confidence with faith5信用Credibility信任Trust with confidence6信心Confidence with faith信賴Trustworthy, reliable7信譽Reputation誠信IntegrityTable 8dOrder of the bases of inter-firm trust for partnering andnon-partnering projectsRankingInter-firm trust for partneringInter-firm trust for non-partnering1信用Credibility信賴Trustworthy, reliable2誠信Integrity信任Trust, confidence3信守Abide by, keep a promise信心Confidence with faith4信賴Trustworthy, reliable信守Abide by, keep a promise5信心Confidence with faith信譽Reputation6信譽Reputation誠信Integrity7信任Trust, confidence信用CredibilityDiscussions with some of the respondents reveal that they trust public and corporate clients for fair payment and predictable procedures in the construction process. Thus, at the interpersonal level, the scores for partnering and non-partnering projects show no significant difference; rather, the scores are affected by the type of clients involved, as in the public projects.  The average inter-firm trust scores at the project level range from 96 to 110, a fairly narrow range. The project scores do not vary significantly, indicating that all projects have obtained high inter-firm trust scores except one partnering project (Project No.9). It follows that partnering projects do not necessarily result in a higher level of inter-firm trust than non-partnering projects. Nevertheless, the project that registers the highest inter-firm trust score has adopted an electronic document management system. This electronic document management system was designed by the contractor to provide a communication platform for all the key players. Drawings, memos, instructions, meeting minutes, reports, etc., that were issued were all uploaded to the computer platform so that the key players can have immediate access to these documents. The information system acted as a collaborative tool and it facilitated better communication and integration of the parties involved.  To draw connections further for the impact of partnering and non-partnering with the data collected from the 10 project cases, it is confirmed that the mean scores obtained from the psychological validated trust scales for interpersonal trust and inter-firm trust are both slightly higher for interpersonal trust and interfirm trust in non-partnering projects (see Table9). It can also be observed that a relatively high trust score for avoiding taking excessive advantages of others is seen in non-partnering projects. It seems that people do adjust themselves when there is trust.Implication for practice in partneringThree significant issues are highlighted by the case studies. First, partnering projects tend to display more of inter-firm trust than interpersonal trust whereas a non-partnering project tends to display a higher interpersonal trust. Secondly, clients and consultants are more prepared to trust at an individual level, while contractors and subcontractors are more prepared to take on inter-firm trust. Consultants, having an independent role in a project organization, demonstrate a preference to trust the individual rather than the firm. Thirdly, the case results offer a relevant scoring system for evaluating the trust levels relevant to a project environment. This provides an insight into the personal and impersonal aspects of construction management.  The research findings indicate that high trust at interpersonal and inter-firm levels does not necessarily come from partnering projects. In the construction industry, trust may be qualified by the stakeholders, the contract, the pre-qualification process, the forms of guarantee or certain rules and procedures; and the degree of trust would also vary between clients and contractors, between different types of project and between projects of different sizes. The ranges of trust score and level of importance proposed for interpersonal and inter-firm trust can be adopted for other studies where the same trust scales are used. All this can be added to create a comprehensive trust model to describe a concept as abstract and as complex as trust. The research shows that the cultivation of trust in a partnering project involves a control mechanism that facilitates timely information exchange among a group of ‘strangers’ working together. The electronic document management system is considered a tool that facilitates quick responses and therefore supports collaboration and thus better integration. The trust it helps in cultivating is inter-firm trust in a multi-party working situation, and this has worked well with a  contractor with a good reputation. But high interpersonal trust is hard to cultivate in a multi-party working situation, even though partnering has been adopted. It is fair to say that inter-firm trust is grounded on the control mechanism such as the open information system, while interpersonal trust is grounded on different foundations including the emotional component such as in ‘faith’, and a long-term relationship requires a coexistence of interpersonal and inter-firm trust.Table 9	The impact of partnering on interpersonal trust and inter-firm trustProject characteristicsInterpersonal trust mean scoreInter-firm trust mean scoreMeanKCNHAAPDPartnering86.525.7226.827.522.925.5Non-partnering91.426.426.828.425.125.1Notes: KC, NH, AA, PD: see Table3b.  In a non-partnering project, trust is believed to emerge as a result of a group of people having previously worked together or having knowledge of each other or the job they do, and there are wellestablished rules and procedures for timely information exchange. It has been observed that the commitment of project participants is indispensable for maintaining trust among the participants. A change of key participants can affect the operation of a project, as revealed in one project case. In a situation that involves multiple parties, such change will lead to de-motivating those who are continuing with the work and the working relationships among them. As the major function of middle management is communication and coordination, middle managers face more problems affecting working relationships than others. This requires interpersonal trust not only with the working team, but also with empowered managers at the scene. It is noted that contractors prefer to establish a longterm relationship with the client in respect of whom they have high predictability, and attempt to earn trust at the interpersonal level to ensure that there is no conflicting objective with the client organization.  Specific trusting behaviours are found to be quick responses, actions taken without proper written agreement or prior to formal instructions, and most importantly a problem-solving attitude in providing solutions in design and in technical matters. Such behaviours are directly felt and observable at the frontline in the interaction among consultants and contractors, and can be found in both partnering and non-partnering projects. When it comes to a tri-party or multi-party situation, interpersonal trust does not have its place and instead inter-firm trust appears to be more appropriate.  Inter-firm trust is important for partnering arrangements. The research findings indicate that ‘keeping commitments’, ‘predictability’ and ‘knowledge of others’ are slightly more important than ‘honest negotiations’ and ‘avoiding taking excessive advantage of others’. This reinforces the findings of the authors’ other work based on Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) (Lau, 2005) when it is used as a mathematical tool to measure the relative importance of the different types of trust that trust relations in the construction working environment are closely related to contractual trust and knowledge trust. Since the projects in this research were mainly project partnering, both clients and contractors should be made aware of the focus if strategic partnering with goodwill, alliance or other forms of inter-firm arrangement are to be developed; and attention should be drawn to the relationship structure of the participants in the project organization. The study provides an insight that the nature of the client organization can affect the development of interpersonal trust.  The temporary nature of a project inhibits the continuity of relationships and limits the benefits of organizational learning. A firm cannot dominate competitive tendering by always being the lowest bidder. Since bidding costs have to be factored into the construction costs, a firm’s behaviour is bound to be influenced by the costs and profitability of a project won this way, which will in turn affect the behaviour of individuals acting in the best interests of the firm, revealing conflicts in a multiple-parties working environment. The level of trust in a relationship affects the degree of defensiveness and distortion of messages. An adversarial culture makes people defensive and protective and forms a barrier to trust. The Tang report (2001) recommended a cultural change to transform the construction industry into a modern, efficient, innovative client-oriented, safe and environmentally responsible industry. This should extend to meaning a socially safe working environment in which people can trust one another without facing the risk of being taken advantage of when the opportunities arise. The construction industry has long been described as fragmented and backward but its operational customs and practice may have their merits. To ease the tensions of a challenging job, it may be a good idea to organize social activities for a group of people whose values are varied but whose commitment is essential to the successful performance of a project. Besides acquiring trusting relationships, joint activity is also one way to share common values of the stakeholders, considering that mutual trust is essential in a multi-party working environment full of different interests, needs, expectations, constraints and risks.  Yet, the implications in practice are not without limitations since the process of partnering has not been considered in this study. It has been suggested by Crane et al. (1997) that the partnering model must be tailored to the company’s needs, objectives and culture; this should be the focus of another study if trust is investigated in this direction. In addition, knowledge about the partner or the partnering firm cannot sufficiently act as a trustbased relationship as it constitutes a reciprocity-based relationship (Lazar, 1997) and the norm of equity (Ring and Van De Ven, 1992).ConclusionThe research has provided objective and qualitative insights into the relationship structure and some managerial aspects of trust in a project working environment. It offers psychological validated trust scales to reflect the complex nature of trust in which the moral, social and work dimensions of trust are all embedded in the trust relations. Since the research confirms that trust exists at both the organizational and individual levels, trust has to be built at both, particularly when a strategic relationship is in mind. A conclusion can thus be drawn that partnering does not necessarily display more trust than non-partnering projects, but rather it helps to develop inter-firm trust; and interpersonal trust is still very important even though inter-firm trust is better understood than interpersonal trust. While clients, consultants, contractors and subcontractors have different emphases of interpersonal and inter-firm trust, keeping commitments and demonstrating cooperation are found to be the typical actions expected from trust. The impact of partnering is more of integration and balancing the multi-party interests for enhancing trusting relationships whereas non-partnering would have different means of producing trusting relationships. It can be said that in a non-partnering arrangement, people tend to rely on the trustworthiness of the person and the firm in which a person is not separated from a firm in terms of trust, whereas such reliance will be based on the ‘virtue’ of the firm and the person as separate identities when a partnering arrangement is adopted. In other words, trust, is grounded on different value bases. Without examining further the behavioural outcome, it would be difficult to explore trust-related issues such as integrity and reliability, which are sources of confidence to be earned over time. With a view that trust can be affected by the values of individuals, value-based trust will help one understand the similarities and differences between firms and people. Therefore it is in a firm’s interest to foster strategic relationships by observing trust relationships at both interpersonal and inter-firm levels with different value bases. For goodwill to be earned, middle managers should understand the value of interpersonal and inter-firm trust.AcknowledgementThe work described in this paper was supported by a grant from the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Project No.CityU 115805 and HKU 71122/04E).Notes1. From the pilot study with 60 respondents, regardless of whether it is inter-firm trust or interpersonal trust, confidence is the most important element that applies to both firms and individuals. Integrity and reliability are more applicable to interpersonal trust while credibility and reputation are more applicable to inter-firm trust. The correlation test shows that ‘trust in firm-to-firm relations’ is strongly related to ‘trust in person-to-person relations’ with a Pearson correlation factor of 0.84 (when p,0.001), which approaches 1. In a paired samples t-test of significance, t50.312, which is less than t52.201 for a significance level of 0.05 df with eleven degrees of freedom (n21). The null hypothesis cannot be rejected and it is concluded that one is not dependent on the other. This means that even though the respondents’ perceive trust in firm-to-firm relations as being strongly related to trust in person-to-person relations, statistically, the selected samples do not show a correlation between the two. This proves that the respondents’ views of firm-to-firm relations are not affected by their views of person-to-person relations.2. See note 1.ReferencesAnderson, J.C. and Narus, J.A. (1990) A model of distribution firm and manufacturer firm working partnerships. Journal of Marketing, 54, 42–58.Argyle, M. (1991) Cooperation: The Basis of Sociability, Routledge, London.Argyle, M. and Henderson, M. (1985) The Anatomy of Relationships—and the Rules and Skills to Manage them Successfully, Heinemann, London.Axelrod, R. (1984) Evolution of Cooperation, Basic Books, New York.Axelrod, R. (1997) The Complexity of Cooperation, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.Barney, J.B. and Hansen, M.H. (1994) Trustworthiness as a source of competitive advantage. Strategic Management Journal, 7, 175–90.Bennett, J. and Jayes, S. (1996) Trust the team: The best practice guide to partnering in construction, Reading Construction Forum, Centre of Strategic Studies in Construction, The University of Reading.Bennett, J. and Jayes, S. (1998) The Seven Pillars of Partnering, Reading Construction Forum, Thomas Telford Publishing, London.Block, P. (1987) The Empowered Manager: Positive Political Skills at Work, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA. Blois, K. (1998) Don’t all firms have relationships? Journal of Business and Industrial Marketing, 13(3), 256–70.Bolton, R. and Bolton, D.G. (1996) People Styles at Work— Making Bad Relationships Good and Good Relationships Better, AMACOM American Management Association, New York.Bresnen, M.K. and Marshall, N. (2000) Motivation, commitment and the use of incentives in partnerships and alliances. Construction Management and Economics, 18, 587–98.Cheng, Y.F. and Pang, S.C. (2003) Trust in Chinese Society, China City Publishers, Beijing.Chiles, T.H. and McMackin, J.F. (1996) Integrating variable risk preferences, trust, and transaction cost economics. Academy of Management Review, 21(1), 73–99.CII (1989) Management and Economics, Construction Industry Institution, National Economic Development Councils Publication, London, UK.Crane, T.G., Felder, P., Thompson, P.J., Thompson, M.G. and Sanders, S.R. (1997) Partnering process model. ASCE Journal of Management in Engineering, 13(3), 58–63.Cummings, L.L. and Bromiley, P. (1996) The Organizational Trust Inventory (OTI): development and validation, in Kramer, R.M. and Tyler, T.R. (eds) Trust in Organizations: Frontiers of Theory and Research, Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA, pp. 302–30.Das, T.K. and Teng, B.-S. (1998) Between trust and control: Developing confidence in partner cooperation in alliances. The Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 491–512.Das, T.K. and Teng, B.-S. (2000) A resource-based theory of strategic alliances. Journal of Management, 26 (1), 31–61.Duck, S. (1990) Understanding Relationships, Guilford Press, New York.Dyer, J.H. and Chu, W. (2000) The determinants of interfirm trust in supplier–automaker relationships in the US, Japan, and Korea. Journal of International Business Studies, 31, pp. 259–65.Fontenot, R.J. and Wilson, E.J. (1997) Relational exchange: a review of selected models for a prediction matrix of relationship activities. Journal of Business Research, 39, 5–12.Fukuyama, F. (1995) Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity, The Free Press, New York.Ghauri, P.N. (2002) Research Methods in Business Studies: A Practical Guide, Prentice Hall, New York.Gulati, R. (1998) The architecture of cooperation: managing coordination costs and appropriation concerns in strategic alliances. Administrative Science Quarterly, December, 1–40. Hart, O. (1989) Incomplete contracts, in Eatwell, J., Milgate, M. and Newman, P. (eds) Allocation,Information, and Markets, Macmillan, London.Hofstede, G. (1994) Cultures’ Consequences: Comparing Values, Behaviors, Institutions and Organizations across Nations, Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA. Hogg, M.A. and Vaughan, G.M. (2002) Social Psychology, 3rd edn, Prentice Hall, New York.Hong Kong Housing Authority (2000) Quality Housing: Partnering for Change, Public Consultation Paper by the Hong Kong Housing Authority.Jackson, J. (1992) Preserving trust in a pluralist culture, in Mahoney, J. and Vallence, E. (eds) Business Ethics in a New Europe, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, the Netherlands.Kao, H.S.R. and Ng, S.K. (1992) Organisational commitment and culture, in Westwood, R.I. (ed.) Organization Behaviour: Southeast Asian Perspectives, Longman, Hong Kong, pp. 173–98.Kwan, A.Y. and Ofori, G. (2001) Chinese culture and successful implementation of partnering in Singapore’s construction industry. Construction Management and Economics, 19, 619–32.Lau, H.L. (2005) Trust relations of the construction industry, PhD thesis, Department of Real Estate and Construction, University of Hong Kong.Lazar, F.D. (1997) Partnering—new benefits from peering inside the black box. ASCE Journal of Management inEngineering, 13(6), 75–83.Lewicki, R.J. and Bunker, B.B. (1996) Developing and maintaining trust in work relationships, in Kramer, R.M. and Tyler, T.R. (eds) Trust in Organizations: Frontiers of Theory and Research, Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.Liu, A.M.M. and Fellows, R.F. (2001) An Eastern perspective on partnering. Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 8(1), 9–19.Matthews, J., Tyler, A. and Thorpe, A. (1996) Pre-construction project partnering: developing the process. Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 3(1/2), 117–31.Meyerson, D., Weick, K.E. and Kramer, R.M. (1996) Swift trust and temporary groups, in Kramer, R.M. and Tyler, T. R. (eds) Trust in Organizations: Frontiers of Theory and Research, Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.Phua, F. (2004) Improving Construction Cooperation: New Theoretical Insights into How and Why, Institute of Physics Publishing, Philadelphia.Powell, M. (1992) Conflict in the context of education in building ethics, in Finn, P. and Gameson, R. (eds) Construction Conflict Management and Resolution, E & FN Spon, London, pp. 388–405.Rempel, J.K. and Holmes, J.G. (1986) How do I trust thee? Psychology Today, Feb., 28–34 [cited by Wrightsman (1991)].Ring, P.S. and Van De Ven, A.H. (1992) Structuring cooperative relationships between organizations. Strategic Management Journal, 13, 483–98.Rotter, J.B. (1967) A new scale for the measurement of trust. Journal of Personality, 39(4), 651–65.Rotter, J.B. (1971) Generalized expectancies of interpersonal trust. American Psychologist, 26, 443–52.Rowlinson, S.M. and Root, D. (1997) The impact of culture on project management. Final Report, Hong Kong/UK Joint Research Scheme, Department of Real Estate and Construction, University of Hong Kong. Sekaran, U. (1992) Research Methods for Business: A SkillBuilding Approach, John Wiley and Sons, New York.Shaw, R.B. (1997) Trust in the Balance: Building Successful Organizations on Results, Integrity, and Concern, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA.Solomon, R.C. and Flores, F. (2001) Building Trust inBusiness, Politics, Relationships, and Life, Oxford University Press, Oxford.Sozen, Z. and Kayahan, O. (2001) Note: correlates of the length of the relationship between main contractor and specialist trade contractors in the construction industry. Construction Management and Economics, 19, 131–3.Swan, W., Wood, G., McDermott, P. and Cooper, R. (2002) Trust in construction: conceptions of trust in project relationship. Paper presented at the CIB W92 January 2002 Conference, Trinidad and Tobago.Tang, H. (2001) Construct for Excellence, Report of the Construction Industry Review Committee, Hong Kong Special Administration Government.Williams, M. (2001) In whom we trust: group membership as an effective context for trust development. Academy of Management Review, 26(3), 377–96.Williamson, O.E. (1993) Calculativeness, trust, and economic organization. Journal of Law and Economics, 36, 453–86.Wilson, D.T. (1995) An integrated model of buyer–supplier relationships. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 23(4), 335–45.Wrightsman, L.S. (1991) Interpersonal trust and attitudes toward human nature, in Robinson, J.P., Shaver, P.R. and Wrightsman, L.S. (eds) Measures of Personality and Social Psychological Attitudes, Academic Press, San Diego, pp. 373–412.Yamagishi, T. and Yamagishi, M. (1994) Trust and commitment in the United States and Japan. Motivation and Emotion, 18(2), 129–66.540	Lau and RowlinsonTrust	541