
CONSTRUCTION 4.0Modelled on the concept of Industry 4.0, the idea of Construction 4.0 is based on a confluence of trends and technologies that promise to reshape the way built environment assets are designed, constructed, and operated.  With the pervasive use of Building Information Modelling (BIM), lean principles, digital technologies, and offsite construction, the industry is at the cusp of this transformation. The critical challenge is the fragmented state of teaching, research, and professional practice in the built environment sector. This handbook aims to overcome this fragmentation by describing Construction 4.0 in the context of its current state, emerging trends and technologies, and the people and process issues that surround the coming transformation.  Construction 4.0 is a framework that is a confluence and convergence of the following broad themes discussed in this book:• Industrial production (prefabrication, 3D printing and assembly, offsite manufacture)• Cyber-physical	systems	(actuators,	sensors,	IoT,	robots,	cobots,	drones)• Digital and computing technologies (BIM, video and laser scanning, AI and cloud computing, big data and data analytics, reality capture, Blockchain, simulation, augmented reality, data standards and interoperability, and vertical and horizontal integration)The aim of this handbook is to describe the Construction 4.0 framework and consequently highlight the resultant processes and practices that allow us to plan, design, deliver, and operate built environment assets more effectively and efficiently by focusing on the physical-to-digital transformation and then digital-to-physical transformation. This book is essential reading for all built environment and AEC stakeholders who need to get to grips with the technological transformations currently shaping their industry, research, and teaching.Anil Sawhney is Director of the Infrastructure Sector for the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors and Visiting Professor of Project Management at Liverpool John Moores University. Anil is a Fellow of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors and a Fellow of the Higher Education Academy. He has over 20 years’ academic and industry experience internationally and has over 200 academic publications. Anil is the co-editor of the Construction Innovation journal and serves on the International Editorial Board of the Journal of Civil Engineering and Environmental Systems and Journal of Information Technology in Construction. He has consulted for numerous organizations including the World Bank.Mike Riley is Pro Vice Chancellor, Engineering and Technology and Professor of Building Surveying at Liverpool John Moores University. He is Visiting Professor at the University of Malaya and at RICS School of Built Environment, Delhi, with over 25 years’ academic and industrial experience, and is joint author of numerous textbooks on Construction Technology and Sustainability as well as numerous academic papers. Mike obtained his first degree from Salford University, followed by a Master of Science from Heriot-Watt University and PhD from Liverpool John Moores University. He is a Fellow of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors and Fellow of the Royal Institution of Surveyors Malaysia, Senior Fellow of the Higher Education Academy, and Chartered Environmentalist.Javier Irizarry P.E., PhD is an Associate Professor in the School of Building Construction at the Georgia Institute of Technology. A pioneer of research on Unmanned Aerial System applications in the built environment, Javier is Director of the CONECTech Lab, which aims to establish the framework for developing next generation technology enhanced solutions for construction problems by incorporating the cognitive processes of the human component of construction operations. He has over 20 years of academic and industry experience and has authored over 100 academic articles. Javier’s research focuses on construction information technologies including virtual and augmented reality, HCI issues in mobile applications for AEC information access, reality capture technology, Situation Awareness driven information system design, and Unmanned Aerial Systems application in the AEC domain. He holds a B.S. in Civil Engineering from the University of Puerto Rico, Mayagüez, a Masters in Engineering Management from the Polytechnic University of Puerto Rico, and a PhD in Civil Engineering from Purdue University. Javier is also a registered Professional Engineer as well as a FAA Licensed Drone Pilot.CONSTRUCTION 4.0An Innovation Platform for the Built EnvironmentEdited by Anil Sawhney, Mike Riley and Javier IrizarryFirst published 2020 by Routledge2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN and by Routledge52 Vanderbilt Avenue, New York, NY 10017Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business© 2020 selection and editorial matter, Anil Sawhney, Mike Riley and Javier Irizarry;  individual chapters, the contributorsThe right of Anil Sawhney, Mike Riley and Javier Irizarry to be identified  as the authors of the editorial material, and of the authors for their  individual chapters, has been asserted in accordance with sections 77  and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced  or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means,  now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording,  or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in  writing from the publishers.      Trademark notice: Product or corporate names  may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only  for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication DataA catalogue record for this book is available from the British LibraryLibrary of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication DataA catalog record has been requested for this bookTypeset in Times New RomanISBN: 978-0-367-02730-8 (hbk)   ISBN: 978-0-429-39810-0 (ebk) by Swales & Willis, Exeter, Devon, UK
CONTENTSAcknowledgements 	xiiiForeword 	xv Notes on contributors 	xvii List of figures 	xxviii List of tables 	xxxviPARt IIntroduction and overview of Construction 4.0, CPS,  Digital Ecosystem, and innovation 	11 	Construction 4.0: Introduction and overview Anil Sawhney, Mike Riley, and Javier Irizarry31.1	Aims	31.2	Introduction	to	Construction	4.0	31.3	Current	state	of	the	construction	sector	61.4	Overview	of	Industry	4.0	71.5	Construction	4.0	framework	131.6	Benefits	of	Construction	4.0	151.7	Challenges	to	implementation	of	Construction	4.0	161.8	Structure	of	the	handbook	171.9	Conclusion	191.10	Summary	19References 192 	Introduction to cyber-physical systems in the built environment Pardis Pishdad-Bozorgi, Xinghua Gao, and Dennis R. Shelden232.1	Aims	232.2	Introduction	232.3	Cyber-physical	systems	and	Construction	4.0	242.4	What	does	success	look	like?	252.5	CPS	for	Smart	Built	Environment	302.6	Conclusion	372.7	Summary	38References 3 	Digital ecosystems in the construction industry— 39current state and future trends Anil Sawhney and Ibrahim S. Odeh423.1	Aims	423.2	Introduction	to	digital	ecosystems	423.3	Current	state	of	digital	technologies	in	construction	463.4	Overview	of	ecosystems	and	platforms	473.5	Digital	ecosystems	in	construction	543.6	Emerging	trends	and	future	directions—platforms	and	ecosystems	583.7	Conclusion	603.8	Summary	60References 4 	Innovation in the construction project delivery networks  60in Construction 4.0 Ken Stowe, Olivier Lépinoy, and Atul Khanzode624.1	Aims	624.2	Introduction	624.3	Context	644.4	Opportunity	for	Construction	4.0	(the	promise)	714.5	Ramifications	of	Construction	4.0	764.6	Challenges	and	considerations	814.7	Conclusion	844.8	Summary	87References 87PARt IICore components of Construction 4.0 895 	Potential of cyber-physical systems in architecture and construction Lauren Vasey and Achim Menges915.1	Aims	915.2	Introduction	915.3	Towards	cyber-physical	construction	5.4	Context:	challenges	and	opportunities	for	cyber-physical		92systems	within	architectural	production	935.5	New	possibilities	enabled	in	architecture	by	cyber-physical	systems	965.6	Conclusion	1075.7	Summary	109References 1096 	Applications of cyber-physical systems in construction Abiola A. Akanmu and Chimay J. Anumba1136.1	Aims	1136.2	Introduction	1136.3	Drivers	for	cyber-physical	systems	in	construction	1146.4	Requirements	for	CPCS	in	construction	1156.5	Cyber-physical	construction	systems	1176.6	Case	studies	1206.7	Challenges	and	barriers	1266.8	Conclusion	1286.9	Summary	128References 1287 	A review of mixed-reality applications in Construction 4.0 Aseel Hussien, Atif Waraich, and Daniel Paes1317.1	Aims	1317.2	Introduction	1317.3	Conclusion	1397.4	Summary	139References 1408 	Overview of optoelectronic technology in Construction 4.0 Erika A. Pärn1428.1	Aims	1428.2	Introduction	1428.3	Fundamentals	of	laser	scan	devices	1448.4	Modes	of	delivery	and	specifications	1448.5	Applications	in	construction	1468.6	Translating	as-built	progress	1478.7	Conclusion	1508.8	Summary	151References 9 	The potential for additive manufacturing to transform  151the construction industry Seyed Hamidreza Ghaffar, Jorge Corker, and Paul Mullett1559.1	Aims	1559.2	Introduction	1559.3	Additive	manufacturing	processes	1579.4	Printable	raw	materials	for	construction	9.5	Practical	and	commercial	challenges	and	opportunities		159for	3D	printing	construction	1649.6	Future	areas	of	research	and	development	1809.7	Conclusion	1829.8	Summary	183References 18310 Digital fabrication in the construction sector Keith Kaseman and Konrad Graser18810.1	Aims	18810.2	Introduction	18810.3	Digital	fabrication	in	architecture	and	construction	18910.4	State	of	research	in	digital	fabrication	19410.5	Research	demonstrator	case	study:	DFAB	HOUSE	(ETH,	2017–2019)	19510.6	Practice	case	study:	SHoP	architects	20010.7	Conclusion	20410.8	Summary	205References 20511 Using BIM for multi-trade prefabrication in construction Mehrdad Arashpour and Ron Wakefield20911.1	Aims	20911.2	Introduction	–	prefabrication	as	a	core	component	of	Construction	4.0	20911.3	Background	–	applications	of	BIM	for	multi-trade	prefabrication	21011.4	Decision	making	on	BIM	for	multi-trade	prefabrication	21211.5	Conclusion	21711.6	Summary	218References 21812 Data standards and data exchange for Construction 4.0 Dennis R. Shelden, Pieter Pauwels, Pardis Pishdad-Bozorgi, and Shu Tang22212.1	Aims	22212.2	Introduction	22212.3	Elements	of	a	data	standard	22312.4	Industry	Foundation	Classes:	overview,	application,	and	limitation	22412.5	Uses	and	applications	22912.6	Evolutions	of	building	data	standards	23012.7	Conclusion	23712.8	Summary	237References 23813 Visual and virtual progress monitoring in Construction 4.0 Jacob J. Lin and Mani Golparvar-Fard24013.1	Aims	24013.2	Computer	vision	for	monitoring	construction	–	an	overview	13.3	Review	on	the	current	state-of-the-art	for	computer	vision		240applications	in	the	industry	and	research	24413.4	Conclusions	25713.5	Summary	259References 25914 Unmanned Aerial System applications in construction Masoud Gheisari, Dayana Bastos Costa, and Javier Irizarry26414.1	Aims	26414.2	Introduction	26414.3	Unmanned	Aerial	Systems	(UASs)	26514.4	UAS	applications	27414.5	UAS	implementation	challenges	28314.6	Conclusion	28414.7	Summary	284References 28515 Future of robotics and automation in construction Borja Garcia de Soto and Miroslaw J. Skibniewski28915.1	Aims	28915.2	Introduction	28915.3	Classification	29215.4	Current	status/examples	29515.5	Main	challenges	and	future	directions	29915.6	Conclusion	30315.7	Summary	303References 30316 Robots in indoor and outdoor environments Bharadwaj R. K. Mantha, Borja Garcia de Soto,  Carol C. Menassa, and Vineet R. Kamat30716.1	Aims	30716.2	Introduction	30716.3	Classification	of	robots	30816.4	Key	fundamental	capabilities	30916.5	Case	study	application	31616.6	Conclusion	32216.7	Summary	322References 17 Domain-knowledge enriched BIM in Construction 4.0:  322design-for-safety and crane safety cases Md. Aslam Hossain, Justin K. W. Yeoh, Ernest L. S. Abbott,  and David K. H. Chua32617.1	Aims	32617.2	Introduction	32617.3	Tacit	knowledge	application	1:	design-for-safety	knowledge			enrich	BIM	for	risk	reviews	33017.4	Explicit	knowledge	application	2:	BIM-based	tower		crane	safety	compliance	system	340	17.5	Conclusion	347	17.6	Summary	347	References 	34718 Internet of things (IoT) and internet enabled physical  	devices for Construction 4.0 	350Yu-Cheng Lin and Weng-Fong Cheung18.1	Aims	35018.2	Introduction 35018.3	Background 35118.4	The	IoT	technologies 35218.5	Applications	of	IoT	in	construction 35618.6	Case	study 35918.7	Conclusion 36718.8	Summary 367References 36819 Cloud-based collaboration and project management Kalyan Vaidyanathan, Koshy Varghese, and Ganesh Devkar37019.1	Aims	37019.2	Introduction	19.3	Construction	today	–	critical	evaluation	of	current	project	370management	frameworks	37219.4	Construction	4.0	–	cloud	based	collaboration	and	evolution		of	construction	information	supply	chain	solutions	37519.5	Transitioning	to	Construction	4.0	38419.6	Conclusion	38919.7	Summary	390References 39020 Use of blockchain for enabling Construction 4.0 Abel Maciel39520.1	Aims	39520.2	Introduction	39520.3	Construction	challenges	in	the	era	of	BIM	39620.4	Context	and	aspects	of	blockchain	40020.5	Application	considerations	40620.6	Blockchain	and	the	construction	sector	40820.7	Challenges	in	the	adoption	of	blockchain	41020.8	The	fourth	wave:	what	might	happen	next	41020.9	Conclusion	41120.10	Summary	412References 413PARt IIIPractical aspects of construction 4.0 including case studies,  overview of start-ups, and future directions 41921 Construction 4.0 case studies Cristina Toca Pérez, Dayana Bastos Costa, and Mike Farragher42121.1	Aims	42121.2	Case	study	1:	4D	BIM	for	logistics	purposes	42121.3	Case	study	2:	the	WikiHouse	project	42821.4	Case	study	3:	the	innovation	lab	43421.5	Conclusion	43921.6	Summary	440References	44022 Cyber threats and actors confronting the Construction 4.0	Erika A. Pärn and Borja Garcia de Soto44122.1	Aims	44122.2	Introduction	44122.3	The	digital	uprising	44522.4	Smart	cities	and	digital	economies	44622.5	Cyberspace,	cyber-physical	attacks	and	critical	infrastructure	hacks	44822.6	What	motivates	a	cyber-attacker?	Actors	and	incident	analysis	44922.7	Looking	at	the	literature	45022.8	Cyber-deterrence	45222.9	Conclusion	45422.10	Summary	454References	45523 Emerging trends and research directions Eyuphan Koc, Evangelos Pantazis, Lucio Soibelman, and David J. Gerber46023.1	Aims	46023.2	Introduction	46023.3	Background	46323.4	Emerging	4.0	trends	in	the	AEC	industry	46723.5	Research	directions	47023.6	Conclusion	47423.7	Summary	475References	475Acronyms 477Index 483
ACkNOwlEdgEmENTSThe editors would like to thank everyone who helped with the inception, development writing, editing, and support for this handbook. This manuscript has resulted from the combined efforts of nearly 60 individual contributors from across the globe, including academics, practitioners, and industry stakeholders. This is a triumph of collaboration and teamwork!  The editors wish to express their sincere thanks to all of the individual chapter authors for their commitment, energy, and enthusiasm in co-creating this work.  Many individuals, companies, and organizations have assisted in developing the various chapters and providing illustrations and information that has allowed the various authors to produce this work. Many of these are cited in the context of specific illustrations or figures within the main text.  In addition, however, we would like to express specific acknowledgement for various chapters as follows:  In relation to Chapter 3, we would like to thank Takefumi Watanuki, a graduate student of the Construction Engineering and Management graduate programme at Columbia University. We also would like to thank Autodesk and Procore for their permission to use the illustrations. Autodesk products referenced in the chapter are registered trademarks or trademarks of Autodesk, Inc, and/or its subsidiaries and/or affiliates in the USA and/or other countries. Procore products referenced in the chapter are registered trademarks or trademarks of Procore Inc. and/or its subsidiaries and/or affiliates in the USA and/or other countries. iModelHub and iModel are registered trademarks or trademarks of Bentley Systems Inc. and/or its subsidiaries and/or affiliates in the USA and/or other countries.  In relation to Chapter 4, we would like to thank everyone who helped with the inspiration, ideas, structure, writing, editing, and support for this chapter. An incomplete list includes: Tristan Randall, Eddy Krygiel, Frank Moore, Steve Duffett, Manu Venugopal, Scott Borduin, Dustin Hartsuiker, Richard Holbrook, James McKenzie, Anil Sawhney, Alan Mossman, Zoubeir Lafhaj, Rafael Sacks, and Lauri Koskela.  The material within Chapter 13 is, in part, based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation Grant #1446765. The support and help of Reconstruct and the construction team in collecting data are greatly appreciated. The opinions, findings, and conclusions or Acknowledgementsrecommendations expressed within this chapter are those of the authors and do not reflect the views of the NSF, or the company mentioned above.  The author of Chapter 20 would like to thank Professor Alan Penn for supporting his construction blockchain research at the Bartlett Faculty of the Built Environment, University College London. He would also like to thank the Construction Blockchain Consortium (CBC) team for their ongoing support and encouragement.  The authors would also like to acknowledge the kind support of WikiHouse (now Opensystemslab) and Oracle in allowing reproduction of the materials required to produce the case studies in Chapter 21.  Finally, the editors would like to express their sincere gratitude for the invaluable contribution of Cristina Toca Pérez, who has committed time, effort, and energy without hesitation. Cristina’s input has been crucial to the successful completion of this work.Co-Editors: Anil Sawhney, Mike Riley, and Javier Irizarry
FOREwORdWith increasing pressures on the built environment sector to provide the infrastructures and homes that are the key economic enablers to city growth, and as people globally are entering our cities at the rate of 3 million people a week, the heat is on construction to design, build, modify, and operate these assets to our changing needs and that of the communities whose evolving demands occupy the space provided.  Construction has continued to innovate, but not at the rate or expectations demanded of it. Therefore, we need to consider the opportunity to radically transform our methods and approaches to construction that enable it to be more efficient and effective in adopting the technologies from other sectors and services to enable it to reshape the way our built environment assets emerge now and for the future. The time is now, because the demand is there for rapid supply, balanced against the costs of the intensification for the supply of skills and resources, coupled with the desire for improved and innovative design.  You will see from reading this book that the key to unlocking the potential and pace of a more rapid “right first time” mentality is putting the physical-to-digital and digital-to-physical transformation at the heart of the delivery process.  The book is timely, as we are at the tipping point of transformative change for construction with already establishing digital practices of Building Information Modelling (BIM), Modern Methods of Construction (MMC) as well as VR/AR, AI, 3D, and IoT as rapidly evolving technologies to expedite design, deliver, and operate are all coming to the fore, backed by the essential data to feed and inform.  There is no doubt that this is an exciting time for the built environment sector and for the transformation of the construction processes that deliver it. But there is a level of pace of change that is needed now to deliver, transform, and metamorphosize the sector and this book captures well the elements necessary to deliver that change.  With this in mind, this book provides the key to unlocking the potential of the built environment sector at a time where the sector needs unlocking to gear it to transform the delivery of Forewordour infrastructure, homes, and cities. The key to unlocking the change needed sits within these pages, with digital innovation at the heart, and the power of you to drive the transformation that will re-establish construction as a key economic enabler for growth.Amanda G Clack MSc BSc PPRICS FRICS FICE FAPM FRSA CCMI FIC CMCExecutive Director and Head of Strategic AdvisoryCBRE LtdRICS Past President  The 2017 McKinsey Global Institute’s publication “Reinventing Construction: A Route to Higher Productivity” showed that the greatest impact on productivity improvement in the construction industry is through the advancement and application of digital and technology solutions. Over the last few years there has been a significant investment by private equity funds in construction industry related digital and technology start-ups and tech companies which has fuelled tremendous growth and innovation in this part of the industry. In “Construction 4.0” the authors pull together all of the relevant elements of these essential solutions and practices and show how they will enable more effective and efficient planning, design, delivery, and operation of physical assets (i.e., capital projects) through a digital transformation. The industry has already made significant advancements over the past 2–3 years but much more is required among all members of the supply chain involved with capital projects. This publication presents a comprehensive review of these emerging solutions and systems and makes the connection of technology with people and processes. Companies and organizations that do not have a “digital strategy” will be able to understand better through “Construction 4.0” how each element complements one other and how each is able to improve performance across all phases of a capital project. While many companies in the industry have utilized BIM or VR/ AR in one form or another, other advancements such as data analytics, Internet of Things (IoT) and use of artificial intelligence are shown to be significant disruptors to the traditional model of project development, design, and delivery with significant benefits to be realized by project owners, designers, and contractors. Construction performance and productivity has stalled tremendously since World War II compared to every other major industry and in order to be ready for the Fourth Industrial Revolution, industry players will need to change and “Construction 4.0” is an excellent guidebook to such transformation.  In addition to helping professionals working in the industry already, this handbook will be a useful resource for several folks in academia … undergraduate and graduate students, researchers and scholars with a keen interest in the ongoing transformation of the construction industry using the Industry 4.0 framework.Tim McManus, Adjunct Professor, Columbia UniversityCONTRIbUTORSErnest L. S. Abbott BSc (Special), MIMA, BA (Hons), MTh, PhD is a research fellow in the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Faculty of Engineering at the National University of Singapore. He has worked in a variety of industries including machine makers, the retail oil industry, shipping – port automation, the finance industry and software development. His interests are eclectic to say the least. His recent research has included productivity improvements in off-shore rig construction, BIM to productivity in construction of public housing, Design for Safety using BIM, and Prefabricated Prefinished Volumetric Construction with RFID and BIM for intelligent logistic and process productivity.Abiola A. Akanmu is an Assistant Professor in the Myers-Lawson School of Construction at Virginia Tech. She is Director of the Automated Systems Lab whose mission is to apply intelligence to the design, construction, and maintenance of building and civil infrastructure systems, and construction workforce education using information and communication technologies. Dr Akanmu’s research interests involves tightly integrating visualization and sensing systems for improving progress monitoring, construction safety, facility management, and construction education so as to enhance predictability and control.Chimay J. Anumba BSc (Hons), PhD, DSc, Dr hc, FREng, CEng, FICE, FIStructE, FASCE is Professor and Dean of the College of Design, Construction and Planning at University of  Florida. His research interests are collaborative design, construction engineering and  informatics, intelligent systems, knowledge management, cyber-physical systems, and project management, with over 500 publications in these fields. He is Editor-in-Chief of the Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management 	 journal and Co-Editor of the Journal of Information Technology in Construction 	.Mehrdad Arashpour PhD, MASCE, MPMI, MRICS, MIEAust is an expert and leading researcher on automation and optimization of design, manufacturing, and assembling processes in offsite prefabrication. His research collaborations with Professor Wakefield on process integration and automation in construction have resulted in several publications in top tier journals and books. Dr Arashpour is one of the selected worldwide members of the Working 
Commission on Offsite Construction (W121) and Infrastructure Task Group (TG91), established by the International Council for Building (CIB). He is the member of Editorial Boards for international journals including Construction Innovation and Journal of Advances in Civil Engineering.Dayana Bastos Costa is Associate Professor from the Department of Structural and Construction Engineering at School of Engineering at Federal University of Bahia. She received her PhD in Civil Engineering and MSc in Civil Engineering both at Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. Dr Costa had opportunities to work as visiting scholar at Salford University, UK and Georgia Institute of Technology, USA. Dr Costa’s research interest includes construction management and technology aiming the improvement of the industry performance. She works in business management and construction sites, involving aspects related to production, quality, safety, and sustainability, integrating with information technology and emergent technologies, such as Unmanned Aerial Systems and Building Information Modelling.Weng-Fong Cheung has a PhD from Department of Civil Engineering of National Taipei University of Technology. His major study is about construction management and focuses on the categories of wireless sensor network (WSN), Building Information Modelling (BIM), digitalization in infrastructure management, construction safety management, and the relative integrated application in construction field. Cheung serves in the Department of Rapid Transit Systems (DORTS) of Taipei city government and acts as a specialist of the management and quality assurance of the construction project. He is also the supervisor and report signatory of the central civil laboratory of DORTS, which ensures the material quality of the metro system.David Chua Kim Huat is a registered professional engineer in Singapore and Professor and Vice Dean at the National University of Singapore. He obtained his PhD from the University of California and has more than 35 years’ research and industry experience. His research areas are lean construction, computer integrated and IT-based construction management, BIM, construction simulation, risk management, and construction safety. He has been Council Member of the Society of Project Managers and System Safety Society and a member of BCA’s International Panel of Experts on BIM and Honorary Fellow of WSHi. He has served as editor for the Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, ASCE and other international journals and conferences.Jorge Corker is senior researcher and Technical Director of the Granular Materials Characterization and Certification Unit lab at the Laboratory for Wear, Testing and Materials of Instituto Pedro Nunes (IPN), Portugal. He is taking his PhD in Civil Engineering at Brunel University London, and is responsible for the development of applied science research projects and specialized technical services in materials at IPN. He has participated in and coordinated several European FP7 and H2020 projects on development of advanced solutions and new insulation materials for construction. His research includes advanced materials for construction, nanomaterials, composites, and materials for energy efficiency and sustainability.Ganesh Devkar is currently working as Associate Professor in the Faculty of Technology, CEPT University, Ahmedabad. He completed his PhD from Indian Institute of Technology Madras (IIT Madras), India, and his doctoral thesis focuses on identifying the competencies necessary for effective implementing Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) in infrastructure xviiiservice delivery and developing a framework that allows urban local bodies to assess their capability to successfully deliver projects through PPPs. His research interests are in the areas of lean construction, PPPs, and urban infrastructure development.Mike Farragher graduated from Liverpool John Moores University in 1991 with a first class degree in Architecture. He is a Chartered Architect and member of the RIBA and has won government awards for Integrated Renewable Technology. He is a Fellow of the Higher Education Academy and has nearly 20 years of industry experience before moving into academia where he has taught at Henan University, China and in the UK. He has published on zero-carbon projects in the UK and is currently researching the development of sanitation systems in sub-Saharan Africa. He has been instrumental in the inception of and enabling works for a primary school in a rural location on the border of Uganda and South Sudan.Xinghua Gao is an Assistant Professor with the Myers-Lawson School of Construction at  Virginia Tech. He received his PhD degree in Building Construction and MSc in Computational Science and Engineering from Georgia Institute of Technology in 2019, MSc in Structural Engineering from Cardiff  University, UK in 2012, and BEng in Civil Engineering from Central South University, China in 2010. Prior to pursuing his PhD, he worked as a structural/Building Information Modeling (BIM) engineer at the China Institute of Building Standard Design & Research. His research interests lie in BIM and Internet of things (IoT)-enabled smart built environments that encompass automated data collection, analysis, and visualization for more efficient and effective construction and facilities management.Borja Garcia de Soto PhD, PE is an Assistant Professor of Civil and Urban Engineering at New York University Abu Dhabi (NYUAD) and holds an appointment as Global Network Assistant Professor in the Department of Civil and Urban Engineering at the Tandon School of Engineering at New York University (NYU). He is the director of the S.M.A.R.T. Construction Research Group at NYUAD and conducts research in the areas of automation and robotics in construction, cybersecurity in the AEC industry, artificial intelligence, lean construction, and BIM. Borja has extensive experience in the industry as a structural engineer, project manager, and construction consultant. He is a Professional Engineer (PE) with licenses in California and Florida and has international experience in multiple aspects of construction projects. Borja received his PhD from ETH Zurich in Switzerland. He also holds an MSc in Civil Engineering with a concentration in engineering and project management from the University of California at Berkeley, an MSc in Civil Engineering with a concentration in structural design from Florida International University (FIU), and a BSc in Civil Engineering (graduated cum laude) also from FIU.David Jason Gerber received his Doctor of Design and Master of Design Studies from Harvard University Graduate School of Design. He also has an M.Arch from the Architectural Association DRL in London and BA in Architecture, University of California, Berkeley. He holds a joint appointment at USC’s Viterbi School of Engineering and USC School of Architecture as Associate Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering Practice and of Architecture and is Director for the Civil Engineering Building Science undergraduate programme. He has extensive international, professional experience with practices including Zaha Hadid Architects in London, Gehry Technologies in Los Angeles, Moshe Safdie Architects in Massachusetts, The Steinberg Group Architects in California, and for Arup as Global Research Manager.Seyed Hamidreza Ghaffar BEng (Hons), PhD, CEng, MICE is the leader of Additive Manufacturing Technology in Construction (AMTC) research group in the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering – Brunel University London. The main area of his research is on valorising construction and demolition waste using materials science and innovative technologies for achieving circular construction. The AMTC research group focuses on the recovery of resources from waste with industrially feasible approaches towards eco-innovative manufac- turing of construction products which is an important element of the transition to a low-carbon economy.Masoud Gheisari is an Assistant Professor in the Rinker School of Construction Management at the University of Florida where he is leading Human-Centered Technology in Construction (HCTC) research group. He received his PhD in Building Construction from Georgia Tech and considers himself an educator and a researcher focusing on theoretical and experimental investigation of human-computer/robot systems in construction. Dr Gheisari’s research interests are in the areas of human-computer/robot interaction, Unmanned Aerial Systems/Vehicles (UAS/ UAVs), real/virtual humans in mixed reality environments, and human-technology interaction in educational settings. He also teaches various courses in the area of Building Information Modelling and technology applications in construction.Mani Golparvar-Fard is Associate Professor of Civil Engineering, Computer Science, and Technology Entrepreneurship at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign (UIUC). He received his PhD degree in Civil Engineering and MS degree in Computer Science from UIUC and MASc in Civil Engineering from University of British Columbia. He received the 2018 ASCE Walter L. Huber award for Innovation in Civil Engineering, the 2017 ENR National Top 20 under 40, 2016 ASCE Dan H. Halpin Award for Scholarship in Construction, the 2013 ASCE James R. Croes Medal for innovation in Civil Engineering, and numerous conference paper awards. He is co-founder and COO of Reconstruct Inc, offering visual data analytics to construction projects.Konrad Graser is researcher at the Chair of Innovative and Industrial Construction at ETH Zurich. He was the project manager and lead architect of the DFAB HOUSE, a full-scale architectural demonstrator of interdisciplinary research in digital fabrication technologies at the Swiss National Center for Competence in Research Digital Fabrication. He was Project Manager Facade Engineering at Werner Sobek Stuttgart, responsible for digital design and engineering of complex building envelopes. Konrad has been a Teaching Assistant at Yale School of Architecture, Adjunct Professor at California College of the Arts, and a technical advisor for at the Institute for Lightweight Structures (ILEK) at the University of Stuttgart.Md. Aslam Hossain is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Nazarbayev University. He obtained his PhD from the National University of Singapore (NUS) and graduated with BSc in Civil Engineering from Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology. Prior his current appointment, Dr Hossain worked as a post-doctoral research fellow at NUS, Assistant Professor at Presidency University and the Islamic University of Technology, Dhaka and senior lecturer at University Malaysia Pahang. His research interests include Design for Safety (DfS), BIM, Construction 4.0, productivity improvement, concurrent engineering, and lean construction. He has published his research findings in premium journals and international conferences.xxAseel Hussien is Programme Leader of Building Surveying and Facilities Management in the Department of the Built Environment (BUE) at Liverpool John Moores University (LJMU). Hussien holds a BSc Degree in Architecture Engineering, and a MSc in Computing Information Systems with Speciality in Augmented Reality. She completed her PhD from the Department of the Built Environment at LJMU in 2017, in which she developed a novel integration of Augmented Reality (AR) technologies with Agile project management philosophy to enhance collaboration and decision-making within the construction industry. She has published many research papers in many peer reviewed international conferences and high impact journals.Vineet R. Kamat PhD is a Professor and the John L. Tishman Faculty Scholar in the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at the University of Michigan. He directs the Laboratory for Interactive Visualization in Engineering and co-directs the Construction Engineering Laboratory. Dr Kamat’s research is primarily focused on Virtual and Augmented Reality Visualization, Simulation, Mobile Computing, Robotics, and their applications in construction.Keith Kaseman is Assistant Professor at the Georgia Institute of Technology School of Architecture, and coordinates the Master of Science in Architecture – Advanced Production, leads design and research studios and directs the interdisciplinary Spatial Futures Lab. His research focuses on AR, VR, MR, UAS, robotics, and other digital fabrication practices in multisystem design-production workflows and experimental spatial systems. Keith has held simultaneous academic posts at the University of Pennsylvania PennDesign, Columbia University GSAPP, and University of Tennessee, Knoxville. He is a partner of KBAS, a design practice launched in 2002 with Julie Beckman and has since led the firm through a diverse array of work utilizing customized design and advanced digital fabrication protocols.Atul Khanzode leads DPR Construction’s Technology and Innovation Group, responsible for the Virtual Design and Construction (VDC), Operations and Preconstruction Technologies, strategic technology initiatives, Innovation, Research & Development and consulting. He is a Board Member at WND Ventures, responsible for managing strategic investments and providing mentorship and operational guidance to leadership teams of the portfolio companies. Atul has a PhD in Construction Engineering and Management, focused on Integrated Practice, VDC, and Lean Construction, from Stanford University and a Master’s Degree in Civil and Environmental Engineering from Duke University, Durham NC.Eyuphan Koc is a PhD student with Dr Lucio Soibelman at University of Southern California Sonny Astani Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering. He obtained his Bachelor’s degrees at Bogazici University, Istanbul, in Civil Engineering with minor in Industrial Engineering. His research, funded by Caltrans, focuses on smart cities with functionalities drawn from smart and resilient infrastructures. His current focus is designing multidisciplinary frameworks investigating resilience in transportation systems to leverage data and modelling from multiple fields including earthquake engineering, transportation systems analysis, and disaster economics. He previously worked for a design and engineering consultancy, a large real estate developer and a heavy civil contractor.Olivier Lépinoy is part of Autodesk Business Development team for the AEC industry. He has led and contributed to wide-ranging projects across architecture, landscape, urban design, real estate, land development, management consulting, digital and new technologies. At Accenture, Olivier was part of the team in charge of French general contractors, and was in charge of strategic initiatives in engineering and construction worldwide. At IBM, he was global leader for Engineering and Construction, taking part in multiple strategic initiatives around digital reinvention worldwide. Olivier holds Master’s degrees in Civil Engineering (Ecole Spéciale des Travaux Publics, Paris) and Earthquake Engineering (UCLA, USA) and is a licensed architect and an urban designer (Ecole d’Architecture de Versailles).Jacob J. Lin is a PhD candidate in the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC). His research focuses on developing and validating computer vision and machine learning algorithms with visual data and Building Information Modelling (BIM) for construction project controls. He has developed a production management system that integrates and visualizes 4D BIM with reality models and enables proactive management of schedule delays. He has awards and recognitions from the World Economic Forum, MIT Tech Review, and the 2015 American Society of Civil Engineers International Workshop on Computing in Civil Engineering for his work on visualizing big visual data for automated UAV-driven construction progress monitoring.Yu-Cheng Lin is a Professor of Construction Engineering and Management at the Department of Civil Engineering of the National Taipei University of Technology. He received a MS degree in the construction management programme of civil engineering from the Polytechnic University, New York, USA (1997) and a PhD from the National Taiwan University (2004). His major research interests are the application of project management and information management in construction projects. His current research interests include construction knowledge management, Building Information Modelling, web-based project management system, IT technology application, IoT and sensors, and construction automation related topics.Abel Maciel is Architect and Senior Research Associate at University College London, focusing on Computational Design, Artificial Intelligence and Distributed Ledger Technology (Blockchain). He is Director of Design Computation Ltd. and has worked, internationally, with some of the world’s leading practices, including Foster + Partners, Zaha Hadid Architects, Herzog & de Meuron, Heatherwick Studio, Arup and BuroHappold. He has advised on numerous projects including Google Campus Mountain View, Google Headquarters London, Apple Park in Cupertino, and Vessel Hudson Yards, New York City. He is a Founding Director and Academic Lead of the Construction Blockchain Consortium (CBC) and Faculty Member of the UCL Centre of Blockchain Technologies.Bharadwaj R. K. Mantha received his Masters and PhD in construction engineering and  management at the University of Michigan. He is currently working as a Post- Doctoral Research Associate in the S.M.A.R.T. Construction Research Group at the New York University  Abu Dhabi. Dr Mantha’s research focuses on developing technological solutions to  monitor, control, and sustainably operate buildings and civil infrastructure systems. To achieve this, he explores interdisciplinary approaches using tools, methods, and frameworks from robotics, cybersecurity, data analytics, simulation, and modelling.Carol C. Menassa PhD is an Associate Professor and the John L. Tishman Faculty Scholar in the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at the University of Michigan. She xxiidirects the Sustainable and Intelligent Civil Infrastructure Systems Laboratory. Dr Menassa’s research focuses on understanding human-robot collaborative processes in the building sciences, modelling the impact of occupants on energy use in buildings, and developing decision frameworks to sustainably retrofit existing buildings.Achim Menges is a registered architect in Frankfurt and professor at Stuttgart University, where he is the Founding Director of the Institute for Computational Design and Construction (ICD) and the Director of the Cluster of Excellence Integrative Computational Design and Construction for Architecture (IntCDC). In addition, he has been Visiting Professor in Architecture at Harvard University’s Graduate School of Design and held multiple other visiting professorships in Europe and the United States. He graduated with honours from the AA School of Architecture, where he subsequently taught as Studio Master and Unit Master in the AA Graduate School and the AA Diploma School.Paul Mullett BEng (Hons), CEng, FICE, FCIArb, PSE is a Chartered Fellow of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators and registered Professional Simulation Engineer with NAFEMS. An accomplished professional consultant with over 25 years’ experience in a variety of technical and managerial roles, Paul has led or executed services including high-level engineering consultancy, specialist engineering, forensic engineering studies, and expert advice. He is Group Engineering and Technology Director for Robert Bird Group pursuing engineering excellence through the strategic application of transformative technologies, identification and adoption of value-adding innovation, and development of staff skills necessary for the future of engineering across the global business.Ibrahim S. Odeh is the Founding Director of the Global Leaders in Construction Management program at Columbia University. His work seamlessly merges the worlds of industry and academia, spans the global construction market, and provides leading construction firms with unique market insights and growth strategies. Professor Odeh worked as an advisory committee member at the World Economic Forum on the Future of Construction initiative and as an advisory board member at Financial Times on a similar initiative. In the fall of 2016, Professor Odeh introduced a project focused on providing Massive Open Online Courses to educate global learners about Construction Management under the Coursera platform. In the program’s first three years, the number of learners registered for his courses exceeded 80,000 from 195 countries, with an additional 400 new learners joining every week! Professor Odeh has won several awards and other recognition such as Columbia University’s Presidential Award for Outstanding Teaching; Top 20 Under 40 by Engineering News Records; and Top 40 Under 40 by Consulting-Specifying Engineer. Professor Odeh received his PhD in Civil Engineering from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and he also holds an MBA.Daniel Paes is a PhD candidate in Building Construction with a minor concentration in Cognitive Psychology and a research assistant in the CONECTech Lab, Georgia Institute of Technology. His research is at the intersection of basic and applied science and is centred on visual perception, presence, and learning in Immersive Virtual Reality (IVR) environments in architectural design, construction, and workforce training applications, identifying opportunities for revolutions in both usability metrics and virtual experiences in the field. His research interests also include Building Information Modelling (BIM), Augmented Reality platforms (AR), Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS), Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) methods, Cognitive Psychology, and Ontologies.
Evangelos Pantazis is research assistant and PhD candidate at University of Southern California, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Viterbi School of Engineering. He focuses on Multi Agent Design Systems and integration of generative design, numerical analysis and digital fabrication. He holds a Master’s of Advanced studies, Computer Aided Architectural Design from ETH, Zurich and Diploma in Architecture from Aristotle’s University of Thessaloniki and a degree in jewellery design and manufacturing from MOKUME jewellery design school. He is a registered architect in Greece and gained international experience including Graft Architects, Berlin; Studio Pei Zhu, Beijing and BuroHappold Engineering, Los Angeles. He co-founded Topotheque, engaging computational design with tangent disciplines, including architecture, furniture, and product design.Erika A. Pärn is a Research Associate at the Institute for Manufacturing (IfM) and Centre for Digital Built Britain (CDBB), Cambridge University. Previously whilst working in industry, she led multiple research projects for the EU commission such as two H2020 initiatives on BIM, digitalisation of the renovation sector and sustainable green construction materials. Her PhD has evaluated the use of BIM and cloud-based technologies to streamline facilities management into the as-built BIM. During her time in academia as lecturer at Birmingham City University, she taught Architectural Technology. Her research focus is upon the multidisciplinary area of “digital built environment and smart city developments” but remains actively involved in broader “construction and civil engineering management” topics such as BIM and FM integration, cybersecurity, and networked and sensor-based BIM.Pieter Pauwels is an Associate Professor at the Eindhoven University of Technology, the Department of the Built Environment. He previously worked at the Department of Architecture and Urban Planning at Ghent University (2008–2019). His work and interests are in information system support for the building life-cycle (architectural design, construction, building operation). With expertise in computer science and software development, he is involved in a number of industry-oriented research projects on topics affiliated to AI in construction, design thinking, Building Information Modelling (BIM), Linked Building Data (LBD), Linked Data in Architecture and Construction (LDAC), and Semantic Web technologies. He has initiated the BuildingSMART LDWG and the W3C LBD Community Group. He implemented and published an IFC-to-RDF conversion service and EXPRESS-to-OWL conversion service, to retrieve complex RDF data for building models. Furthermore, he is highly active as a teacher, leading courses on Fundamentals of BIM, Parametric Design, Building Informatics, and Linked Data in Architecture and Construction.Pardis Pishdad-Bozorgi is Assistant Professor in the School of Building Construction at Georgia Tech. She focuses on developing innovative integrated Architecture/Engineering/Construction/Facility Management solutions for smart built environments, developing  cutting-edge mechanisms that address process fragmentations in delivering and operating the built environment. Her publications are on emerging fields, such as Building Information Modelling, Internet of Things, Integrated Project Delivery, Flash Tracking, Trust-Building, and Lean Construction with around 40 articles in key journals and conferences. She holds a PhD degree in Environmental Design and Planning (Virginia Tech), Master’s degrees in Civil Engineering (Virginia Tech), Project Management (Harvard), and Architecture (University of Tehran). She has received multiple awards, including Construction Management Association of America National Educator of the Year.Dennis R. Shelden is Associate Professor of Architecture and Director of the Digital Building Laboratory at Georgia Tech. He is expert in applications of digital technology to building design, construction, and operations. His experience spans education and research, technology development, and professional practice across architecture, engineering, and computing disciplines. He directs Georgia Tech’s PhD in Architecture and MS in Architecture: Building Information and Systems programmes. Prior to joining Georgia Tech, he led the development of Frank Gehry’s digital practice as Director of R&D and Director of Computing and later as Co-founder and Chief Technology Officer of technology spin-off Gehry Technologies. He was Associate Professor of Practice in Computation and Design at MIT and has taught at UCLA and SCIARC.Miroslaw J. Skibniewski PhD is Professor of Civil Engineering and Construction Project Management at the University of Maryland and serves as Editor-in-Chief of Automation in Construction.  He heads the e-Construction Group, focused on innovative applications of construction information and automation technologies, collaborating with leading American, Asian, and European academic and industry partners in construction automation and robotics R&D.  He was Professor of Civil Engineering, Construction Engineering and Management at Purdue University, where he collaborated with major Japanese engineering and construction firms in construction robotics implementation.   Lucio Soibelman was Assistant Professor at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and Associate Professor and Professor to the Civil and Environmental Engineering Department at Carnegie Mellon University. He joined the University of Southern California as Chair of the Sonny Astani Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering and is editor of the Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering. He is recipient of the FIATECH Outstanding Researcher Celebration of Engineering & Technology Innovation Award, and ASCE Construction Institute Construction Management award. He was appointed as Viterbi Dean Professor at USC and Distinguished 1,000 talent Professor at Tsinghua University. He focuses on advanced data acquisition, visualization, and mining for construction and operations of advanced infrastructure.Ken Stowe P.E. is construction technology advisor, development strategist, and project systems coach at Autodesk, Inc. With 25 years of experience in construction management and project control on US and international projects as large as $1.4 billion; 15 years in BIM, cloud software, ROI analysis, and big analytics experience in 22 countries, and contributions to four books, Stowe works with a team at Autodesk responsible for construction business development and strategy initiatives worldwide. Together, they leverage project performance research and pursue the synergy of technologies and construction performance improvement for measurably better decisions, planning, construction execution and asset performance. Kenneth holds two degrees from Dartmouth College and Thayer School of Engineering and Professional Engineering certification.Shu tang is currently a PhD student in Design Computation in the School of Architecture at Georgia Tech. She is conducting research in Digital Building Laboratory. She previously worked for years as a BIM Engineer for several BIM consultancy companies. Prior to joining Georgia Tech, Shu taught and conducted research at the University of Nottingham Ningbo China.  Shu’s current research is a systematic investigation of defining data interoperability requirements between smart building systems for the Internet of Things (IoT) and Building Information Modelling (BIM), trying to extend digital systems (the Internet and the Web) into the physical realm (the built environment, the transportation system, etc.)Cristina t. Pérez is a doctoral student of Engineering at Federal University of Bahia (UFBA) – Brazil. She completed her undergraduate studies at the University of Cantabria, Spain in 2011. Cristina received her MSc in Environmental and Urban Engineering at Federal University of Bahia, Brazil, in 2015. Since 2012, Pérez works as a researcher at the Department of Structural and Construction Engineering at the School of Engineering at UFBA. Pérez had opportunities to work as visiting researcher at Georgia Institute of Technology – USA in 2018–2019 and at Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS) – Brazil in 2014. Her doctoral research, in 2018, was recognized in a Brazilian competition with the Academic Innovation Award. Pérez has worked as an Assistant Professor at undergraduate and graduate programs at SENAI CIMATEC School of Technology, Ruy Barbosa DeVry University and Estacio de Sá University, all of them in Salvador, Brazil.Kalyan Vaidyanathan is co-founder CEO of Nadhi Information Technologies Pvt Ltd, incubated out of IIT Madras research park. He has nearly 20 years’ experience in managing construction projects and enterprise software development. He has won many awards, including the 2015 Technologist Innovator award: Construction Industry Development Council, Government of India. He was named Entrepreneur of the Year 2014 by CII, Chennai. He has published widely on modern construction technology and lean construction both nationally and internationally. “Overview of IT Applications in the Construction Supply Chain” was his chapter in the Construction Supply Chain Management Handbook. He holds an MS from  Cornell University, USA and a B Tech in Civil Engineering from IIT Madras, India.Koshy Varghese is Professor at IIT Madras in Building Technology and Construction Management Division, Department of Civil Engineering. His research interest is in computer- integrated construction and he has published widely in this area. He is a member of the editorial board of the Journal of Automation in Construction and the Journal of Information Technology in Construction and the past-president of the International Association for Automation and Robotics in Construction (IAARC). Varghese has been a visiting faculty at the University of Texas and Arizona State University, USA. He completed his PhD from the University of Texas at Austin, USA and a B.E. in Civil Engineering from the College of Engineering Guindy, Chennai, India.Lauren Vasey is Research Associate and Doctoral Candidate at the Institute for Computational Design and Construction, University of Stuttgart. Lauren focuses on adaptive robotic construction processes, with sensor feedback tightly coupled to backend computational processing. She previously researched at University of Michigan Taubman College FABLab and ETH-Zurich, Chair for Architecture and Digital Fabrication. Her work has been recognized in international competitions including Kuka Innovation Award, Fast Company Innovation By Design, and AEC Hackathons. She has lectured at venues including ACM Siggraph and Advances in Architectural Geometry (AAG), and collaborated with research partners including Autodesk and the European Space Agency. Lauren is a member of the Board of Directors of ACADIA, Chair of the scientific committee, and editor of International Journal of Architectural Computing.Atif Waraich PhD is Head of Department of Computer Science at Liverpool John Moores University. He was previously Head of Division of Digital Media and Entertainment Technology at Manchester Metropolitan University and founder and Director of the Manchester Usability Laboratory. His research focuses on the use of technology to enhance learning, specifically, how game-like environments can be used to promote learning and motivate learners to engage in their studies. He researches the use of usability engineering in developing and accessing gameplay for computer games and has a growing interest in the application of usability and behaviour modification techniques (including gamification) to Augmented and Virtual Reality environments.Ron Wakefield is Professor of Construction, Deputy Pro Vice-Chancellor; International and Dean of the School of Property, Construction and Project Management at RMIT, Australia. Ron researches and teaches process simulation and modelling, residential and commercial construction and use of information technology in construction management. Prior to joining RMIT, he was the William E. Jamerson Professor of Building Construction in the Department of Building Construction and Associate Director for Building Technology Research at the Center for Housing Research, Virginia Tech. Ron has over 25 years’ experience as an international researcher, consultant, and engineer in building construction. He is Director of Launch Housing and JJR Consulting and co-opted member of the Victorian Building Practitioners Board.Justin K. W. Yeoh is a Lecturer at the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, National University of Singapore. He graduated with a BEng (Civil Engineering), and subsequently obtained his PhD. His research interests lie in Applied Optimization for  Construction and Facilities Management, Semantics in Building Information Models (BIM), Process Re- engineering and Machine Learning for Construction Metrology. Prior to his current appointment, Dr Yeoh worked as a post-doctoral research fellow at NUS and Carnegie Mellon University. He has also worked as a project management consultant and BIM consultant, identifying good site practices for construction.
FIgURES1.1	Conceptual	model	of	CPS	41.2	Conceptual	model	of	a	digital	ecosystem	41.3	Construction	4.0	as	a	combination	of	CPS	and	digital	ecosystem	41.4	Physical	to	digital	and	digital	to	physical	transformation	51.5	Themes	of	Construction	4.0	61.6	Key	challenges	faced	by	the	construction	sector	81.7	Evolution	of	embedded	systems	101.8	Industry	4.0	and	its	key	components	111.9	Enabling	technologies	and	key	features	of	I4.0	121.10	Conceptual	illustration	of	Construction	4.0	framework	141.11	Components	of	Construction	4.0	framework	2.1		An	architecture	of	the	envisioned	Smart	Built	Environment		15in	Construction	4.0	312.2	The	basic	facility	data	package	generation	332.3	Data	flow	of	the	proposed	screw	gun	with	counter	372.4	The	proposed	smart	robotic	agents	383.1	Role	of	digital	ecosystems	in	Construction	4.0	433.2	Construction	4.0	transformation	based	on	platforms	and	ecosystems	453.3	Traditional	model	of	digital	transformation	in	the	construction	sector	463.4	Traditional	product	firm	483.5	Platform-based	firm	483.6	Ecosystem-based	firm	493.7	Classification	of	ecosystems	and	their	link	to	platforms	513.8	Illustration	of	a	digital	ecosystem	523.9	Complementary	products	based	on	digital	ecosystem	543.10	Autodesk	Forge	ecosystem	553.11	Forge	design	automation	API	for	Revit	563.12	Services	available	through	the	Forge	platform	563.13	Revit	Family	app	using	design	Automation	API	573.14	Procore	App	Marketplace	573.15	iModel.js	platform	from	Bentley	Systems	584.1	The	concept	of	waste	as	understood	in	lean	construction	674.2	COAA’s	Fishbone	Rework	Cause	Classification	684.3	The	four	dimensions	influence	on	the	innovation	initiative	724.4	The	House	of	Construction	Tech	754.5		Data	breakdown	structure	for	two	purposes	–	better	asset	and			better	project	824.6		The	innovation	environment	leading	to	beneficial	adaptation			to	Construction	4.0	865.1	Components	of	a	cyber-physical	system	935.2		A	dual	robot	collaborative	cell	with	external	axis	for	on-site	timber		manufacturing	985.3		Multi-robot	collaborative	set-up	for	the	fabrication	of	long-span	fibre		composites	1005.4	12-meter	long	cantilever	under	construction	1015.5		Collaborative	robotic	workbench	for	timber	prefabrication		1035.6		Augmented	reality	interface	for	human-robot	collaborative	construction	1035.7	Wood	Chip	Barn,	Architectural	Association’s	Design	+	Make	program	1055.8		Scanned	locally	sourced	wood	utilized	in	a	CAD	design	environment,		Architectural	Association’s	Design	+	Make	program	1055.9		An	active	control-loop	manipulating	a	network	of	turn	buckles	was		connected	to	a	back-end	form-finding	process	to	help	correct	deviations			resulting	from	the	physical	production	process	1075.10	Textile	reinforced	thin-shell	concrete	in	production,	NEST	HiLo	1076.1	Key	features	of	CPCS	1186.2	Bi-directional	coordination	approach	to	CPCS	1186.3	System	architecture	for	bi-directional	coordination	approach	to	CPCS	1196.4	Steel	placement	scenario	1216.5	Bulk	material	tracking	and	control	1226.6	Flexible	postural	learning	environment	1246.7		User	performing	a	‘attach	stud’	subtask	and	virtual	instructor	showing	his		performance	–	safe	and	unsafe	posture	1246.8	Site	layout	management	workflow	1267.1		Daqri®	AR	hard	hat	application	in	facility	management	(upper)	and		projections	on	the	hat’s	display	(bottom)	1357.2	The	SiteVision™	AR	viewer	136	7.3		Immersive	design	review	application	user	interface	(left)	inside			an	HMD-based	VR	system	(right)	137	7.4	Projection-based	VR	crane	operator	training	platform	1388.1		Exemplar	of	triangulation	calculation	method	for	a	terrestrial	laser		scanner	which	commonly	use	either	TOF	or	phase-shift	methods			for	point	capture	145	8.2	Example		of	Scan-to-BIM	used	for	automated	masonry	recognition		149	8.3		Example	of	Scan-vs-BIM	149	9.1	3D	printing	system	mechanisms	156	9.2		Printable	feedstock	(raw	materials)	formulation	from	waste			using	additives	161	9.3		Apis	Cor	mobile	3D	printer’s	specification	and	the	3D	printer	in			action	165	9.4		Some	of	the	various	AM	project	demonstrations	around	the	world		(a)	WinSun	in	China;	(b),	(c),	and	(g)	CyBe	Construction	B.V.	in		Italy,	Saudi	Arabia,	and	UAE	respectively,	(d)	Marine	Corps	Systems	Command	in	USA;	(e)	XtreeE	project	demonstrations	in	France;			(f)	WASP	in	Italy	166	9.5	The	opportunities	presented	by	AM	for	the	construction	industry	169	9.6	Collapse	of	3D-printing	under	the	weight	of	subsequent	layers	178	9.7	Temporary	shoring	to	provide	stability	178	9.8		Integrated	delivery	of	an	AM	system	for	construction	181	10.1		Component	catalog	from	bid	documents	for	Camera	Obscura	at			Mitchell	Park	by	SHoP	Architects,	ca	2003	191	10.2		Roof	module,	Heasley	Nine	Bridges	Golf	Resort	by	Shigeru	Ban			Architects	in	Seoul,	South	Korea	(2008)	19310.3		ICD/ITKE	Research	Pavilion	2014–2015,	a	composite	structure		utilizing	robotically	woven	carbon	fibers	within	a	pneumatic	shell	194	10.4	DFAB	HOUSE	by	ETH	as	completed	in	February	2019	19510.5		In	situ	Fabricator	(IF)	deploying	the	Mesh	Mould,	a	fabrication		system	for	free-form	cast-in-place	concrete	structures,	at	the			DFAB	House	197	10.6	 Spatial	Timber	Assemblies	in	production	in	the	Robotic			Fabrication	Lab	at	ETH	Zurich	199	10.7		DFAB	House	Innovation	Objects	(IOs):	Lightweight	Translucent		Façade,	Spatial	Timber	Assemblies,	Smart	Slab,	Smart	Dynamic			Casting	(SDC),	Mesh	Mould	(listed	from	top	to	bottom)	200	10.8		Structure	and	envelope	model	for	Barclays	Center	in	Brooklyn,			NY	by	SHoP	Architects	(completed	2012)	201	10.9		Installation	of	digitally	fabricated	facade	component	assemblies			at	Barclays	Center	201	10.10  Lidar scan of Botswana Innovation Hub under construction 	20311.1		Case	project	–	an	educational	complex	that	deploys	MTP	and		involves	various	prefabricated	components	and	multiple	trades	210xxx11.2	Structural	BIM	model	of	the	case	project	21311.3		BIM	for	MTP	–	diffusion	of	innovations	within	the			Construction	4.0	context	21411.4		Number	of	BIM	users	(innovators)	vs.	potential	BIM	adopters			(imitators)	21411.5		Simulation	results	–	number	of	BIM	adopters	influenced	by			dynamic	variables	21511.6	Training	effect	on	BIM	for	MTP	implementation	21611.7		Importance	of	BIM	training	for	MTP	in	increasing	early	implementation	21611.8	Optimizing	BIM	training	for	MTP	21712.1	Layers	of	internet	stack	22412.2	IFC	Infra	project	schema	organization	22512.3	IFC	standards	triangle	22812.4		The	experiment	framework:	connecting	BACnet,	IFC,	and	CityGML			based	databases	23212.5	IFC	data	and	schema	23412.6	Example	of	RDF	data	model	23412.7	Example	of	IFC-based	RDF	graph	23612.8	Linked	Building	Data	graph	23713.1	Various	forms	of	visual	data	and	their	frequency	of	capture	24313.2		The	top	image	shows	MEP	and	structural	system	overlay	on	top	of		a	360	image,	the	bottom	left	shows	a	2D	drawing	overlay	on	orthographic	photo,	the	bottom	right	shows	volumetric	measurement			on	a	point	cloud	model	24413.3		Typical	challenges	in	using	Standard	SfM	techniques	for	image-	based	3D	reconstruction:	camera	misregistration	due	to	repetitive		structure	and	lack	of	long	range	shots	(top	left);	distortions	in	angle	and	distance	(top	right);	curved	point	cloud	due	to	camera	calibration	failure	and	lack	of	oblique	photo	capture	(bottom	left),	and	incomplete	point			cloud	reconstruction	due	to	fail	loop	closure	24613.4	Image-based	3D	reconstruction	workflow	24713.5		Image-based	3D	reconstruction	where	X1,	X2,	X3	are	three	back-	projected	3D	points	from	the	visual	features	of	three	Images	P1,	P2,			and	P3	24713.6		Surveying	targets	used	for	registration	of	point	clouds	and	point	cloud		to	BIM	25013.7		Progress	is	shown	in	as-built	and	4D	BIM	models	with	color-coded		status	superimposed	together	(left)	(M.	Golparvar-Fard	et	al.,	2012),			laser	scanned	as-built	(middle)	and	4D	BIM	model	(right)		25213.8		Using	patches	retrieved	from	BIM	to	2D	back-projection	to	classify		material	and	performing	depth	test	to	exclude	occluding	area	(K.	Han	and	Golparvar-Fard,	2015)	(left);	progress	status	is	extracted	by	comparing	as-built	and	as-planned	after	occupancy	detection	and			material	classification	(right)	253
13.9		The	first	column	shows	progress	via	4D	point cloud	and	BIM;	the		second	column	shows	that	location-based	4D	BIM	model	and	work-	in-progress	tracking	integrated	with	point	clouds;	the	third	column		shows	the	4D	BIM	with	subcontractor	responsible	tasks	color-coded	to		communicate	who	does	what	work	in	what	location	25613.10		The	web-based	system	has	been	used	on	different	construction	site		during	the	coordination	meetings,	it	has	been	proved	that	it	can	efficiently	enhance	accountability	and	traceability,	and	predictive		analytics	improve	reliability	in	short-term	planning	256	14.1	UAS	types	and	examples	266	14.2	UAS	degree	of	autonomy	continuum	267	14.3	Level	of	autonomy	269	14.4	Applying	a	UAS	to	project	evaluation	in	an	urban	area	275	14.5	Applying	a	UAS	to	earth	moving	27614.6	Applying	a	UAS	to	site	transportation	277 14.7	Applying	UASs	to	chimney	construction	280	14.8	Applying	a	UAS	to	steep	slope	roof	inspection	281	15.1	Number	of	articles	in	the	ISARC	proceedings	from	1984	to	2019	290	15.2		History	of	robotics	in	construction	291	15.3		General	view	of	SAM	and	mason	worker	in	the	Delbert	Day	project,		MO,	USA	in	2016	295	15.4	Single		task	robot	to	tie	rebar	in	a	bridge	project		297	15.5		In	situ	Fabricator	298	15.6		Autonomous	installation	of	gypsum	board	by	HRP-5P	299	15.7		Exterior	view	of	sky	factory	(a)	and	general	view	of	the	interior			workspace	(b)		300	16.1		Different	subtypes	of	robots	namely	a)	wheeled,	b)	tracked,	and			c)	legged	depending	on	the	mechanical	structure	of	the	robot	30916.2		Taxonomy	of	robots	based	on	work	environment	(i.e.	indoor	and		outdoor),	task	requirements	(e.g.	domestic	tasks),	and	construction			life	cycle	phase	310	16.3		Graphical	node	network	representation	consisting	of	13	nodes			and	14	edges	311	16.4	Two	of	the	AprilTags	from	36h11	series	313	16.5		Overview	of	the	marker	network	map	design	process	for	autonomous			indoor	robotic	navigation	314	16.6		Example	representation	of	a	few	different	markers	315	16.7		Components	of	the	mobile	robot	used	for	ambient	data	collection	in			buildings	317	16.8		Marker	Network	Map	(MNM)	with	virtual	information	regarding			the	location	stored	in	each	of	the	markers	318	16.9		Autonomous	indoor	treasure	hunt	based	navigation	algorithm	with	the			help	of	a	network	of	fiducial	markers	32016.10		Illustration	of	drift	accumulation	and marker	to marker	distance			for	an	indoor	mobile	robot	32017.1	The	DIKW	pyramid	32917.2	Example	of	rules	for	DfS	33117.3	Six-level	DfS	taxonomy	hierarchy	33217.4	Structure	of	DfS	rule	33217.5	Structure	of	DfS	required	design	feature	33317.6	List	of	risk	narratives	33517.7		Defining	mitigation	narratives	(“D”	stands	for	design	suggestion			and	“C”	stands	for	construction	suggestion)	33517.8	Language	structure	of	defining	Atomic	Rules	33617.9	Key	components	for	DfS	review	system	33717.10	Illustrative	BIM	33817.11	Rule-based	checking	for	design	element	beam	and	column	33917.12	Risk	Register	for	the	case	example	34017.13	System	architecture	of	automated	tower	crane	compliance	system	34117.14	A	taxonomy	for	fixed	crane	spaces	34217.15	Mapping	of	spaces	to	crane	information	models	34317.16	Relationships	between	spaces	from	CIM	and	BIM	34317.17	Workflow	for	checking	safety	compliance	using	SPARQL	queries	34417.18	Proposed	layout	with	Crane	Information	Models	34517.19	Plan	view	showing	site	boundary,	CIM	and	deep	beam	position	34617.20	Elevation	view	showing	CIM	and	building	heights	with	clearances	34618.1	Multi-tier	architecture	analysis	of	the	system	36018.2	The	developed	sensor	node	(expanded)	36218.3	The	BIM	model	constructions	for	the	system	36318.4	Integrating	mechanism	of	the	WSN	data	and	BIM	model	component	36418.5	The	design	layout	of	the	field	test	36518.6	The	field	test	in	the	tunnel	36618.7		Screenshot	of	the	operational	CPS	for	tunnel	safety	management		(Location	01	detected	hazardous	gas	and	demonstrates	the	warning			in	red)	36619.1	Construction	supply	chain	37119.2	Timelines	of	stakeholder	involvement	in	construction	projects	37319.3	Lean	enabled	integrated	project	controls	38019.4	Collaborative	project	controls	platform	38119.5	Levels	of	development	of	CSC	38520.1	Bitcoin	block	data	40221.1	Floor	plan	of	buildings	42221.2	Example	of	a	one-story	building	with	two	units	42221.3	Improvised		anchors	are	used	for	keeping	up	the	steel	formwork	panels	42321.4	Formwork	is	transported	above	a	worker	42421.5	A	formwork	panel	is	stocked	in	the	main	door	424	21.6	Transportation	activity	made	by	the telescopic handler	425	21.7		Crane	being	used	for	the	formwork	disassembly	and	telescopic	handler		working	in	the	formwork	assembly	425	21.8	Seminar	with	managers	426	21.9	Workshop	with	workers	at	work	site	426	21.10		Workers	are	aware	the	sequence	plan	and	improvisation	activities	are		eliminated	427	21.11	Work-in-progress	is	reduced	427	21.12	Typical	procurement	route	429	21.13	Wren	system	429	21.14	Typical	joint	assembly	in	the	Wren	system	430	21.15	WikiFarmHouse	completed	431	21.16	Drawing	section	431	21.17	Concrete	foundation	432	21.18	CNC-milled	plywood	was	cut	in	an	offsite	workshop	432	21.19	Structural	cassettes	432	21.20	Cassettes	were	lifted	onto	the	foundation	433	21.21	Water-resistant	membrane	application	433	21.22	Roof	and	cladding	installation	433	21.23	Innovation	Lab	434	21.24	Drones	used	at	Innovation	Lab	435	21.25	Autonomous	vehicle	435	21.26	Worker	sensors	and	alerts	435	21.27	RFID	tag	scanner	436	21.28	RFID	tag	436	21.29	Workers	sensors	and	alerts	437	21.30	Spot-r	Clips	438	21.31	Worker	data	in	BIM	environment	438	21.32	Cloud-based	data	collected	by	drone	439	22.1		The	cyber	risks	of	networked	CDE	and	levels	of	BIM	451	23.1	Chronology	of	industrial	revolutions	461	23.2	Three	types	of	fragmentation	in	the	construction	industry	464	23.3		Integration	in	the	industry	through	the	adoption	of	4.0	concepts	and		technologies	46623.4		Categorization	of	concepts	and	technologies	in	Construction	4.0	into	the	clusters	they	belong	in	(e.g.	Smart	Construction	Site)	and		corresponding	stages	of	diffusion	within	different	phases	of	the			building	life	cycle	46823.5		Construction	4.0	concepts	and	technologies	in	terms	of	their	“paths”		across	stages	of	innovation	diffusion	in	time,	and	the	envisioned		convergence	of	technologies	onto	integrated	project	delivery			settings	in	the	upcoming	decades	47123.6		The	flows	of	information	(influence) between	industry,	academia	and	various	project	phases	today	and	the	changes	envisioned	to	occur	as	the	industry	moves	forward	to	a	4.0	state.	Disruption	waves	originating	in	tech	industries	as	well	as	the	challenges	of	the	21st	century	are		describing	the	disciplines	to	be	integrated	in	the	next	generation		curricula	will	be	necessary	473
TAblES1.1 	Contents of the handbook 189.1 	13 house construction 3D printers 1599.2 	Cost comparison of AM versus traditional construction 17212.1 The common data fields between BACnet XML and IFC XML 23312.2 The common data fields between IFC XML and CityGML 23314.1 Main requirements of 14 CFR, Part 107 (FAA, 2017) 14.2  Main requirements for small UASs (20–25 kgs.) according to international  272regulations 27315.1 Buildings constructed by Japanese contractors using construction automation 29415.2 Projects in which SAM has been used since its first application in 2015 29618.1 Comparison between Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and ZigBee 35418.2 The descriptions of each layer 36118.3 Developed WSN nodes and its functions 19.1  The various processes in the EPC phase of construction projects that  362involve collaboration and project management 37720.1 SHA-256 example 401Part IIntroduction and overview of Construction 4.0, CPS, digital Ecosystem, and innovation

1 CONSTRUCTION 4.0Introduction and overviewAnil Sawhney, Mike Riley, and Javier Irizarry1.1 aims• Provide	an	overview	of	Industry	4.0	and	the	Fourth	Industrial	Revolution.• Provide	a	comprehensive	review	of	the	current	state	of	the	construction	sector.• Describe	the	overall	Construction	4.0	framework.• Articulate	the	purpose	of	Construction	4.0.• Describe	the	handbook,	its	three	parts,	and	its	various	chapters.1.2 Introduction to Construction 4.0With	the	advent	of	the	Fourth	Industrial	Revolution	(4IR)	and	the	resulting	framework	of	Industry 4.0 (I4.0)	(MacDougall,	2014),	the	built	environment	sector	also	has	the	opportunity	to	leapfrog	to	more	efficient	production,	business	models,	and	value	chains.	Such	a	transformation	is	possible	through	the	convergence	of	existing	and	emerging	technologies	that	form	part	of	the	Industry	4.0	paradigm	(Oesterreich	and	Teuteberg,	2016).	This	transformative	framework	is	called	the	Construction 4.0	framework	in	this	handbook.	Modelled	after	the	concept	of	Industry	4.0,	the	idea	of	Construction	4.0	is	based	on	a	confluence	of	trends	and	technologies	(both	digital	and	physical)	that	promise	to	reshape	the	way	built	environment	assets	are	designed	and	constructed.  In	4IR,	the	fundamental	driver	is	the	use	of	cyber-physical	systems.	Cyber-physical systems	(CPS)	are	enabling	technologies	that	bring	the	virtual	and	physical	worlds	together	to	create	a	truly	networked	world	in	which	intelligent	objects	communicate	and	interact	with	each	other	(Griffor	et	al.,	2017).	A	conceptual	model	of	the	CPS	is	provided	in	Figure	1.1.  The	Construction	4.0	framework	uses	CPS	as	a	core	driver	and	links	it	with	the	concept	of	Digital	Ecosystem	where	‘A	digital	ecosystem	is	an	interdependent	group	of	enterprises,	people	and/or	things	that	share	standardized	digital	platforms	for	a	mutually	beneficial	purpose,	such	as	commercial	gain,	innovation	or	common	interest’	(Gartner,	2017).	The	idea	of	a	Digital	Ecosystem	is	shown	in	Figure	1.2.  Construction	4.0	combines	CPS	and	Digital	Ecosystem	to	create	a	new	paradigm	for	the	design	and	construction	of	our	built	environment	assets	as	shown	in	Figure	1.3.	Figure 1.1 	Conceptual	model	of	CPS	Figure 1.2 	Conceptual	model	of	a	Digital	Ecosystem	Figure 1.3 	Construction	4.0	as	a	combination	of	CPS	and	Digital	Ecosystem  Using	the	CPS,	the	cyber-physical	gap that	exists	in the	built	environment can	be	bridged,	and	by	concomitantly	using	the	Digital	Ecosystem	the	work	processes	to	collaborate	efficiently	across	the	project	delivery	network	to	design	and	construct	the	asset	can	be	enhanced.	The	Construction	4.0	framework,	therefore,	provides	a	mechanism	via	which	we	can:a. Digitally	model	the	built	assets	that	already	exist	in	our	physical	world.b. Design	new	assets	in	the	backdrop	of	what	already	exists	or	plan	for	the	retrofit	and	rehabilitation	of	existing	assets	using	these	digital	models.c. Once	these	assets	are	digitally	captured	and	designed,	use	digital	and	physical	technologies	to	deliver	these	physical	assets.The	same	framework	can	be	adopted	during	the	operation	phase	of	the	constructed	asset	by	using	similar	digital	and	physical	technologies	to	support	Facilities	Management	(FM)	functions.	However,	the	focus	of	this	handbook	is	limited	to	the	design	and	construction	phases.  The	aim	of	this	handbook	is	to	describe	the	Construction	4.0	framework	and	consequently	highlight	the	resultant	processes	and	practices	that	allow	us	to	plan,	design,	and	deliver	built	environment	assets	more	effectively	and	efficiently	by	focusing	on	the	physical-to-digital	transformation	and	then	digital-to-physical	transformation.	This	concept	is	illustrated	graphically	in	Figure	1.4.  With	the	pervasive	use	of	Building	Information	Modeling	(BIM),	lean	principles,	digital	technologies,	and	offsite	construction	the	industry	is	at	the	cusp	of	this	transformation.	The	critical	challenge	is	the	fragmented	state	of	our	teaching,	research,	and	professional	practice	in	the	built	environment	domain.	The	authors	and	editors	of	this	handbook	aim	to	overcome	this	fragmentation	by	describing	Construction	4.0	in	the	context	of	current	state,	emerging	trends	and	technologies,	and	people	and	process	issues	that	surround	the	proposed	transformation.  Construction	4.0	is	a	framework	that	is	a	confluence	and	convergence	of	the	following	broad	themes:• Industrial	production	(prefabrication,	3D	printing,	and	assembly,	offsite	manufacture).• Cyber-physical	systems	(robots	and	cobots	for	repetitive	and	dangerous	processes,	and	drones	for	surveying	and	lifting,	moving	and	positioning,	and	actuators).Figure 1.4 	Physical	to	digital	and	digital	to	physical	transformationAnil Sawhney et al.	Figure 1.5 	Themes	of	Construction	4.0• Digital	technologies	(BIM,	video	and	laser	scanning,	IoT,	sensors,	AI	and	cloud	computing,	big	data	and	data	analytics,	reality	capture,	Blockchain,	simulation,	augmented	reality,	data	standards	and	interoperability,	and	vertical	and	horizontal	integration).With	this	background	and	motivating	factors,	the	handbook	will	address	issues	surrounding	the	key	themes	of	people,	processes	and	practice,	and	new	technologies	(as	shown	in	Figure	1.5).  Modern	digital	and	physical	technologies	are	required	to	achieve	the	overarching	vision	of	the	4IR	(Jacobides,	Sundararajan,	and	Van	Alstyne,	2019)	that	underpins	the	Construction	4.0	framework,	therefore,	the	framework	relies	on	two	broad	paradigms:	(1)	cyber-physical	systems	and	(2)	Digital	Ecosystems.	Innovations	in	both	cyber-physical	and	digital	paradigms	are	necessary	to	advance	the	vision	of	Construction	4.0	in	our	industry.1.3 Current state of the construction sectorGiven	the	importance	of	the	construction	sector	to	their	national	economies,	several	countries	have	undertaken	studies	to	identify	the	challenges	and	opportunities	that	the	industry	presents.	For	example,	the	UK	has	conducted	several	prominent	studies	to	document	the	problems	of	the	construction	sector	to	put	in	place	a	program	for	improvement	of	the	whole-of-the-sector.	Sir	John	Egan,	the	chair	of	the	Construction	Task	Force,	published	his	report	entitled	Rethinking Construction	in	1998	(Egan,	1998).	It	was	instrumental	in	laying	out	a	road	map	for	the	efficiency	improvements	within	the	construction	industry	in	the	UK.	This	came	close	on	the	heels	of	the	report,	titled	‘Constructing	the	Team’	authored	by	Sir	Michael	Latham	and	published	in	1994.	The	Latham	report	identified	inefficiencies	and	made	recommendations	for	enhanced	collaboration	and	coordination	in	the	industry	(Latham,	1994).	More	recently,	the	UK	released	a	report	by	Mark	Farmer	entitled	‘Modernise	or	Die’	(Farmer,	2016)	that	used	a	‘strong	medical	process	analogy’.	Around	the	time	that	this	study	was	being	conducted,	the	UK	government	also	released	their	Construction	2025	industrial	strategy	with	a	plan	to	commit	close	to	£75	million	in	research	and	development.  Other	countries,	such	as	the	US,	Australia,	Canada,	Singapore,	and	China,	have	also	undertaken	sector-wide	studies.	For	example,	a	similar	exercise	was	conducted	in	the	US,	where	Construction	Users	Roundtable	produced	a	detailed	report	to	outline	a	path	to	competitive	advantage	for	construction	users.  Several	developing	nations	have	also	undertaken	such	studies	that	identify	the	problems	faced	and	listed	the	difficulties	hindering	growth	(Al-Momani,	1995b,	1995a;	Edmonds,	1979;	Manoliadis,	Tsolas,	and	Nakou,	2006;	Moavenzadeh,	1978;	Moore	and	Shearer,	2004;	Ofori,	1989,	1994,	2000).	This	is	even	more	important	because	in	developing	countries	the	construction	sector’s	capacity	constraints	impact	the	economic	development	process	(Wells,	2001).	These	6studies	have	also	developed	action	points necessary	for the	development	of the	construction	industry	(Ofori,	1994,	2000)	including	the	importance	of	developing	key	performance	indicators	(Beatham	et	al.,	2004;	Ofori,	2000).	A	priority-based	approach	was	proposed	to	rank	solutions	offered	by	the	researchers	and	policymakers	(Ofori,	1990)	with	several	researchers	presenting	an	optimistic	case	about	the	improvement	plans	(Koenigsberger	and	Groak,	1978;	Turin,	1973).  The	repeated	nature	of	these	national	studies	show	that	there	is	stagnation	and	barring	some	incremental	improvements;	the	industry	as	a	whole	has	still	not	managed	to	show	major	improvements.	The	results	have	been	mostly	disappointing	(Chemillier,	1988;	Ofori,	1984,	1990;	UNCHS,	1990).	Barring	a	few	countries,	the	problems	have	persisted	over	a	long	period	despite	efforts	made	to	overcome	them.	This	has	been	pointed	out	in	the	Farmer	report	that	states	‘construction	has	not	even	made	the	transition	to	“industry	3.0”	status	which	is	predicated	on	large	scale	use	of	electronics	and	IT	to	automate	production’	(Farmer,	2016;	Gerbert	et	al.,	2017).	Research	has	pointed	towards	a	long-term	strategic	approach	to	be	followed,	which	is	related	to	the	socio-economic	needs	of	the	country,	often	overseen	by	a	steering	committee	(Farmer,	2016;	Ofori,	1994).  The	studies	described	above	have	generally	identified	a	standard	set	of	challenges	or	problems	that	the	industry	faces.	In	one	such	study	a	list	of	ten	grand	challenges	(shown	in	Figure	1.6)	faced	by	the	construction	sector	in	India	were	identified	(Sawhney,	Agnihotri,	and	Paul,	2014).  The	following	are	the	key	challenges	that	have	been	collated	from	these	studies	(Farmer,	2016;	Gerbert	et	al.,	2017;	Global	Industry	Council,	2018;	Sawhney	and	Agnihotri,	2014;	Witthoeft	and	Kosta,	2017):1. Low	levels	of	research	and	development	leading	to	a	lack	of	innovation	and	delayed	adoption	of	technologies.2. Workforce	issues	including	shortage	of	young	talent	due	in	part	to	poor	industry	image.3. Informal	processes	and	lack	of	process	standardization	leading	to	structural	fragmentation.4. Low	levels	of	cross-functional	cooperation	and	limited	collaboration	leading	to	a	lack	of	improvement	culture.5. Low	productivity,	predictability,	and	profits.6. Adversarial	transaction-based	procurement	regime.7. Insufficient	knowledge	transfer	from	project	to	project.8. Cultural	and	mindset	issues	that	act	as	a	blocker	to	any	change.These	issues	require	a	transformational	change	(Farmer,	2016)	in	the	industry,	and	we	envision	that	Industry	4.0	can	provide	a	broad	framework	for	such	a	change.1.4 Overview of Industry 4.0During	the	Hannover	Messe	in	2011,	the	German	Federal	Government	released	its	vision	for	the	future	of	the	manufacturing	sector	under	the	broad	umbrella	term	INDUSTRIE	4.0	(Roblek,	Meško,	and	Krapež,	2016).	It	became	part	of	the	‘High-Tech	Strategy	2020’	project	that	continues	to	grow	and	evolve	(MacDougall,	2014).	This	initiative	later	became	a	globally	recognized	paradigm	that	was	broadly	referenced	as	I4.0,	also	seen	as	a	precursor	to	the	Fourth	Industrial	Revolution	(Drath	and	Horch,	2014).	Other	terms	such	as	smart	factory,	smart	manufacturing,	smart	production,	etc.,	have	also	been	used	to	define	this	broad	paradigm	(Oesterreich	and	Teuteberg,	2016).  Similar	initiatives	have	also	been	launched	by	other	countries.	For	example,	the	United	States	developed	the	‘Advanced Manufacturing	Partnership’	in	2014	(Rafael,	Jackson,	and	Liveris,	2014)	and	updated	it	in	2016,	the UK	launched an	initiative	entitled ‘Future	of	Manufacturing’	(Foresight,	2013)	and	China	is	implementing	the	‘Made	in	China	2025’	program	(Liao	et	al.,	2017).  While	the	First	Industrial	Revolution	was	catalyzed	by	steam-powered	mechanical	production,	the	second	was	driven	by	electrical-powered	mass	production;	the	third	was	based	on	electronics	and	automation,	the	Fourth	Industrial	Revolution	has	begun	with	the	promulgation	of	CPS	and	related	technologies	(MacDougall,	2014;	Pereira	and	Romero,	2017).	It	is	envisioned	that	I4.0	will	have	far-reaching	implications	on	the	manufacturing	sector	that	are,	in	turn,	likely	to	have	broad	social	and	economic	benefits	for	nations	and	societies	that	embrace	this	framework	(Oesterreich	and	Teuteberg,	2016).	Furthermore,	I4.0	uses	technologies	such	as	service	orientation,	smart	production,	interoperability,	cloud	computing,	big	data	analytics,	and	cybersecurity	(Vogel-Heuser	and	Hess,	2016).	I4.0	facilitates	interconnection	and	computerization	in	traditional	industries,	which	makes	an	automatic	and	flexible	adaptation	of	the	production	chain	and	provides	new	types	of	services	and	business	models	of	interaction	in	the	value	chain	(Liao	et	al.,	2017;	Lu,	2017).1.4.1 Definition of Industry 4.0I4.0	is	a	broad	term	that	has	been	presented	as	a	‘confluence	of	trends	and	technologies	promises	to	reshape	the	way	things	are	made’	(Baur	and	Wee,	2015).	There	are	several	definitions	of	I4.0	but	no	globally	accepted	one	because	the	vision,	mission,	and	components	of	I4.0	are	still	emerging	and	are	being	connected	to	more	significant	and	broader	themes	such	as	sustainability	and	circular	economy	(Lopes	de	Sousa	Jabbour	et	al.,	2018;	Müller,	Kiel,	and	Voigt,	2018;	Rajput	and	Singh,	2019).  The	German	government	describes	I4.0	as	‘a	new	technological	age	for	manufacturing	that	uses	cyber-physical	systems	and	Internet	of	Things,	Data	and	Services	to	connect	production	technologies	with	smart	production	processes’	(Kagermann,	Wahlster,	and	Helbig,	2013;	MacDougall,	2014)	to	make	manufacturing	smart.	I4.0	has	also	been	defined	at	a	higher	level	as	‘a	new	level	of	value	chain	organization	and	management	across	the	lifecycle	of	products’	(Hermann,	Pentek,	and	Otto,	2016;	Kagermann,	Wahlster,	and	Helbig,	2013).	It	is	also	defined	as	the	integration	of	machinery	and	devices	with	networked	sensors	and	software	that	can	be	used	to	predict,	control,	and	plan	for	better	business	and	societal	outcomes	(Shafiq	et	al.,	2015).	In	a	way,	I4.0	improves	manufacturing	organizations,	business	models	that	they	use,	and	their	production	processes	through	the	use	of	physical	and	digital	technologies.  I4.0	is	seen	as	a	cross-cutting	paradigm	that	can	have	broad	social	and	economic	benefits.	It	is	seen	as	a	way	to	revolutionize	manufacturing	and	other	major	sectors,	such	as	energy,	health,	smart	cities,	and	mobility	(MacDougall,	2014).	The	motivation	behind	this	handbook	is	that	I4.0	can	also	act	as	catalyst	for	the	future	of	construction	that	is	more	industrialized	and	automated.	We	use	this	motivation	to	coin	the	term	Construction	4.0.1.4.2 Key components of I4.0I4.0	is	a	very	broad	and	encompassing	term.	Therefore,	it	is	essential	to	understand	the	key	components	of	I4.0.	Researchers	agree	that	the	push	towards	I4.0	came	from	the	evolution	of	embedded	systems	to	more	advanced	cyber-physical	systems	(CPS)	(Vogel-Heuser	and	Hess,	2016).	This	has	also	formed	the	basis	of	the	vision	developed	by	the	German	government.	CPS	is	a	set	of	technologies	that	connect	the	virtual	and	physical	worlds	together	to	create	a	genuinely	networked	production environment	in	which	intelligent	objects	communicate	and	Anil Sawhney et al.interact	with	each	other	(Kagermann,	Wahlster,	and	Helbig,	2013a).	The	journey	towards	I4.0	began	with	the	embedded	systems	and	their	technological	evolution	towards	CPS	and	further	to	provide	an	Internet	of	Things	(IoT),	Data	and	Services.	Figure	1.7	shows	this	evolution	of	the	embedded	systems	to	CPS.  A	CPS	is	defined	as	‘a	mechanism	that	is	controlled	or	monitored	by	computer-based	algorithms,	tightly	integrated	with	the	Internet	and	its	users’	(Monostori	et	al.,	2016).	CPS	creates	a	virtual	copy	of	the	physical	production	system	that	is	also	called	the	digital	twin.	This	is	the	first	step	towards	I4.0,	where	a	physical-digital-physical	loop	is	created	(Rutgers	and	Sniderman,	2018).	The	production	environment	in	the	factory	that	is	created	through	this	is	also	known	as	the	Cyber-Physical	Production	System	(CPPS)	(Vogel-Heuser	and	Hess,	2016).	CPPS	results	in	a	digitalized,	smart,	optimized,	service-oriented,	and	interoperable	production	environment	upon	which	other	components	of	I4.0	are	built.  Once	the	digital	twin	of	a	manufacturing	environment	is	created,	other	business	and	technical	aspects	of	the	production	process	are	linked	into	the	I4.0	framework	through	the	Internet	of	Things,	Data	and	Services.	Figure	1.8	shows	the	key	components	of	I4.0.	The	very	core	of	I4.0	is	formed	by	the	IoT	layer	that	connects	physical	objects	and	things,	collects	data	from	these	connected	objects,	and	allows	connected	objects	to	communicate	with	each	other.	Based	on	this	core	layer	are	the	CPS	and	CPPS	layers	of	the	I4.0.	CPS	helps	create	the	digital	twin	of	the	physical	world,	in	this	case,	the	manufacturing	unit.	This	allows	a	loop	in	which	the	physical	components	that	are	connected	to	each	other	relay	data	that	can	be	used	for	a	variety	of	purposes	including	decision	making.	Changes	to	the	physical	world	can	be	made	via	actuators	thereby	completing	the	loop.	Figure 1.7 	Evolution	of	embedded	systems10Figure 1.8 	Industry	4.0	and	its	key	components  The	CPPS	sits	on	top	of	the	CPS	layer	and	provides	data	about	the	physical	world	anywhere	and	anytime,	and	helps	connect,	control,	communicate,	and	compute.	CPPS	provides	an	intensive	connection	with	the	surrounding	physical	world	and	its	ongoing	processes	(Monostori	et	al.,	2016).	Finally,	the	topmost	layer	is	the	Internet	of	Data	and	Internet	of	Services	(IoS).	The	IoS	creates	a	service-oriented	ecosystem	and	brings	the	end-user	of	customer	centricity	to	the	system	(Hofmann	and	Rüsch,	2017).	IoS	allows	the	digital	tools	that	support	end-user	functions	to	be	available	as	a	service	on	the	Internet	(Alcácer	and	Cruz-Machado,	2019).	Both	internal	and	cross-organizational	services	are	offered	and	utilized	by	participants	of	the	value	chain	(Reis	and	Gonçalves,	2018).	The	IoS	helps	create	networks	incorporating	the	entire	manufacturing	process	that	convert	factories	into	a	smart	environment	(Kagermann,	Wahlster,	and	Helbig,	2013a).1.4.3 Enabling technologies and key featuresIn	addition	to	defining	the	I4.0	framework	by	describing	its	key	components,	the	framework	can	also	be	defined	by	identifying	its	enabling	technologies	and	key	features.	Liao	et	al.	used	over	224	research	papers	published	over	five	years	(2012–2016)	to	determine	these	technologies	and	key	features	of	I4.0	(Liao	et	al.,	2017).	Figure	1.9	shows	the	enabling	technologies	and	key	features	of	I4.0	as	determined	by	the	literature	review.	The	vision	of	I4.0	can	be	accomplished	through	a	collective	deployment	of	several	related	technologies	(Alcácer	and	Cruz-Machado,	2019).	These	technologies	work	in	conjunction	with	the	IoT,	CPS,	CPPS,	and	IoS	as	identified	in	the	previous	section	(Griffor	et	al.,	2017).	Based	on	the	frequency	of	usage	and	mention	in	the	literature	these	technologies	are	rank-ordered	in	Figure	1.9.Similarly	the	key	features	of	I4.0	from	literature	are	also	listed	in	rank	order	in	the	figure.	From	the	literature	it	can	be	seen	that	both	in	research	and	practice	significant	attention	is	given	to	automation,	integration,	and	collaboration.	Less	tractable	features	such	as	innovation,	quality,	and	sustainability	are	still not	prevalent.Anil Sawhney et al.	Figure 1.9 	Enabling	technologies	and	key	features	of	I4.01.4.4 Interoperability and integration in I4.0Integration	and	interoperability	are	two	key	drivers	in	the	I4.0	framework	(Kagermann,	Wahlster,	and	Helbig,	2013a;	Vogel-Heuser	and	Hess,	2016).	Interoperability	helps	two	or	more	systems	work	with	each	other	to	exchange	data,	information,	and	knowledge.	Interoperability	is	achieved	through	a	shared	understanding	of	concepts,	standards,	languages,	and	relationships	(Xu,	Da,	Xu,	and	Li,	2018).  I4.0	leads	to	the	integration	of	processes,	systems,	applications,	and	organizations	(Oesterreich	and	Teuteberg,	2016).	It	is	anticipated	that	I4.0	will	allow	the	following	three	levels	of	integration	(Kagermann,	Wahlster,	and	Helbig,	2013a):• Horizontal	integration	through	value	networks.• End-to-end	digital	integration	of	engineering	across	the	entire	value	chain.• Vertical	integration	and	networked	manufacturing	systems.1.4.5 Impact of Industry 4.0There	are	several	areas	that	can	be	impacted	and	improved	by	the	application	of	I4.0	at	the	sector	level	(Kagermann,	Wahlster,	and	Helbig,	2013;	Oesterreich	and	Teuteberg,	2016;	Rose	et	al.,	2016):1. Productivity	improvement:	I4.0	provides	several	improvements	such	as	automation,	real-time	inventory	management,	and	continuous	optimization	that	lead	to	productivity	enhancement.2. Increased	quality:	ongoing	monitoring	and	control	of	production	allows	for	improved	quality	of	products	and	services.3. Increased	flexibility:	with	a	customer-centric	approach,	I4.0	allows	manufacturing	flexibility	through	automation	and	robotics.4. Increased	speed:	with	enhanced	product	life	cycle	management	and	physical-digital-	physical	integration,	the	speed	of	production	is	enhanced.125. Safer	and	better	working	conditions:	with	increased	automation,	real-time	monitoring	of	incidents,	better-designed	workstations,	and	enhanced	work	structuring,	workers	have	safer	and	better	working	conditions.6. Improved	collaboration:	as	the	availability	of	data	is	enhanced,	and	digital	layer	and	physical	layer	are	integrated	the	intra-	and	inter-organization	collaboration	is	improved.7. Sustainability:	optimized	use	of	resources,	reduction	in	defects,	and	other	environmental	improvements	make	operations	more	sustainable.8. Innovation:	I4.0	leads	to	new	ways	of	creating	value	and	new	forms	of	employment,	for	example	through	downstream	services.1.5 Construction 4.0 frameworkFigure	1.10	shows	the	various	layers	and	components	of	the	Construction	4.0	framework.	BIM	and	a	cloud-based	Common	Data	Environment	(CDE)	are	central	to	the	Construction	4.0	framework	(Cooper,	2018;	Oesterreich	and	Teuteberg,	2016).	While	BIM	provides	the	modeling	and	simulation	features	that	are	a	core	component	of	the	I4.0	framework,	CDE	acts	as	a	repository	for	storing	all	the	data	that	relates	to	the	construction	project	over	its	life	cycle. The	use	of	BIM	and	CDE	creates	a	single	platform	that	helps	promote:1. Integration	of	all	phases	of	the	project	life	cycle	(vertical	integration),	all	members	of	the	project	team	(horizontal	integration),	and	inter-project	learning	and	knowledge	management	(longitudinal	integration).2. Linkage	between	the	physical	and	cyber	(digital)	layer	over	the	entire	project	life	cycle.	This	allows	the	implementers	of	Construction	4.0	to	utilize	both	physical	and	digital	technologies	in	an	integrated	manner.Within	the	Construction	4.0	framework,	the	following	three	transformational	trends	take	place:1. Industrial	production	and	construction:	by	using	prefabrication,	3D	printing,	and	assembly,	offsite	manufacture,	and	automation,	the	issues	and	challenges	caused	by	on-site	construction	techniques	are	significantly	reduced.	This	type	of	industrialized	process	allows	production	to	be	digitally	linked	to	BIM	and	CDE	so	that	instructions	can	be	directly	delivered	for	physical	production	and	any	production-related	information	from	the	physical	layer	can	be	fed	back	to	the	digital	layer.2. Cyber-physical	systems:	the	construction	site	under	Construction	4.0	uses	robotics	and	automation	for	production,	transport,	and	assembly,	actuators	for	converting	digital	signals	into	physical	actions,	and	sensors	and	IoT	to	sense	important	information	about	physical	objects	(including	people)	from	the	physical	layer.3. Digital	technologies:	the	digital	transformation	relies	on	the	Digital	Ecosystem	that	is	developed	in	the	digital	layer	of	the	Construction	4.0	framework.	BIM	and	CDE	provide	the	framework	upon	which	integrated	digital	tools	are	built.	With	the	help	of	video	and	laser	scanning	technology,	artificial	intelligence	(AI)	and	cloud	computing,	big	data	and	data	analytics,	reality	capture,	Blockchain,	simulation,	and	augmented	reality	the	delivery	and	business	process	is	supported	in	the	Construction	4.0	framework.	While	Digital	Ecosystems	provide	the	innovation	needed	for	this	support,	data	standards	and	interoperability	also	play	an	essential	role	in	this	overall	transformation.Figure	1.11	shows	the	components	of	the	Construction	4.0	framework,	the	role	they	play	in	the	framework	and	the	layer	in	which they	are	present.Figure 1.11 Components	of	Construction	4.0	framework1.6 Benefits of Construction 4.0Several	recent	studies	have	attempted	to	define	the	I4.0	framework	in	general	and	provide	a	road	map	for	research	and	implementation	based	on	a	detailed	literature	scan	(Alcácer	and	Cruz-Machado,	2019;	Liao	et	al.,	2017;	Pereira	and	Romero,	2017).	Similar	attempts	are	being	made	in	regards	to	Construction	4.0	(Cooper,	2018;	Dallasega,	Rauch,	and	Linder,	2018;	Oesterreich	and	Teuteberg,	2016).	These	studies	focus	on	identifying	the	sectoral	benefits	of	the	Industry	4.0	concept	in	general	and	Construction	4.0	in	particular.	Based	on	these	studies,	the	benefits	of	the	Construction	4.0	framework	are	listed	below:1. Enabling	an	innovative	environment:	the	Construction	4.0	framework	may	provide	the	right	mix	of	enablers	to	allow	the	innovation	mindset	to	take	root	in	the	industry.	Through	Anil Sawhney et al.an	integration	of	the	physical	and	digital	layer,	it	is	likely	that	this	innovation	will	lead	to	integrated	solutions	that	will	strike	at	the	heart	of	horizontal,	vertical,	and	longitudinal	fragmentation	that	currently	dominates	the	industry.2. Improving	sustainability:	the	integrated	framework	of	Construction	4.0	allows	the	industry	to	fully	embrace	a	life	cycle	approach	and	ensure	prudent	use	of	resources	with	a	significant	reduction	in	energy	usage	and	emissions.3. Improving	the	image	of	the	industry:	the	construction	industry	suffers	from	an	image	problem	caused	by	several	factors.	It	is	well	known	for	its	harsh	working	environment	and	its	low	level	of	automation	and	digitization	(Farmer,	2016;	Oesterreich	and	Teuteberg,	2016).	The	digital	and	physical	technologies	of	Construction	4.0	can	improve	the	image	of	the	industry	by	transforming	the	work,	the	worker,	and	the	workplace,	and	make	it	more	attractive	for	recruitment	and	retention	of	talent.4. Cost	savings:	use	of	industrialized	construction	supported	by	digital	technologies,	BIM,	and	CDE,	can	help	reduce	inefficiencies	and	waste.	Robotics	and	automation	can	result	in	a	reduction	in	direct	costs.	Real-time	access	to	the	physical	layer	with	abundance	of	data	will	improve	decision	making	and	provide	financial	incentives	for	project	teams	to	collaborate	and	innovate.5. Time	savings:	modern	methods	of	construction	like	prefabrication,	additive	manufacturing,	and	on-site	assembly	will	improve	the	speed	of	construction.	With	real-time	access	to	field	data,	any	potential	delays	can	be	avoided,	resulting	in	time	savings.6. Enhancing	safety:	Construction	4.0	will	enhance	site	safety.	Augmented	Reality/Virtual	Reality	(AR/VR)	based	training,	wearable	technologies,	IoT	based	connectivity	of	objects,	things,	and	people,	image	and	video	processing	can	enhance	safety.7. Better	time	and	cost	predictability:	with	real-time	monitoring,	automated	site	data		collection,	image	processing,	AI,	and	analytics	tools	the	time	and	cost	predictability	of	ongoing	projects	can	be	improved.	Availability	of	large	volumes	of	historical	data	and	information	can	help	set	benchmarks	for	early	time	and	cost	prediction	of	new	projects,	thereby	allowing	longitudinal	integration.8. Improving	quality:	the	horizontal	and	vertical	integration	resulting	from	the	adoption	of	Construction	4.0	framework	allows	the	monitoring	and	control	of	the	design	and	production	processes,	thereby	improving	the	quality	of	construction.9. Improving	collaboration	and	communication:	use	of	cloud-based	project	management	tools,	Blockchain,	central	repository	of	information	and	real-time	data	access	enhances	trust	among	the	project	team	members	and	enhances	communication,	coordination,	and	collaboration.10. Customer	and	end-user	centric	world	view:	with	the	reduction	in	tedious	and	repetitive	tasks,	the	project	team	focuses	on	creating	value	and	focusing	on	what	matters	most	to	the	customer.1.7 Challenges to implementation of Construction 4.0The	Farmer	report	documented	the	reluctance	of	the	construction	sector	to	embrace	technology	and	summarized	that	the	industry	missed	the	Industry	3.0	transformation	(Farmer,	2016).	Dallasega,	Rauch,	and	Linder	and	Oesterreich	and	Teuteberg	based	on	an	extensive	literature	review	developed	the	following	list	of	implementation	challenges	the	sector	faces	while	implementing	Construction	4.0	framework	(Dallasega,	Rauch,	and	Linder,	2018;	Oesterreich	and	Teuteberg,	2016):16ContentsContentsvivvvivvContributorsContributorsvContributorsContributorsContributorsvvContributorsvFiguresFiguresvvFigures		Figures		vvFigures	vvvConstruction 4.0			33