Review of application of analytic hierarchy process (AHP) in constructionAmos Darko, Albert Ping Chuen Chan, Ernest Effah Ameyaw, Emmanuel Kingsford Owusu, Erika Pärn & David John EdwardsTo cite this article: Amos Darko, Albert Ping Chuen Chan, Ernest Effah Ameyaw, Emmanuel Kingsford Owusu, Erika Pärn & David John Edwards (2019) Review of application of analytic hierarchy process (AHP) in construction, International Journal of Construction Management, 19:5, 436-452, DOI: 10.1080/15623599.2018.1452098To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/15623599.2018.1452098Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tjcm20
Review of application of analytic hierarchy process (AHP) in constructionAmos Darko a, Albert Ping Chuen Chan a, Ernest Effah Ameyawb, Emmanuel Kingsford Owusua, Erika P€arnc and David John EdwardscaDepartment of Building and Real Estate, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong; bSchool of Engineering, Environment and Computing, Coventry University, Coventry, UK; cFaculty of Technology, Environment and Engineering, Birmingham City University, Birmingham, UKABSTRACTThe analytic hierarchy process (AHP) has gained increasing attention in construction management (CM) domain as a technique to analyse complex situations and make sound decisions. However, AHP per se or its potential applications on CM problems are ill-defined within extant literature. The present paper reviews 77 AHP-based papers published in eight selected peer-reviewed CM journals from 2004 to 2014 to better define and delineate AHP application areas and decisionmaking problems solved within CM. The findings indicated that risk management and sustainable construction were the most popular AHP application areas in CM. It was also revealed that AHP (1) is flexible and can be used as a stand-alone tool or in conjunction with other tools to resolve construction decision-making problems; and (2) is widely used in Asia. In addition, the most prominent justifications for using AHP were found to be small sample size, high level of consistency, simplicity and availability of user-friendly software. This paper provides a useful reference for researchers and practitioners interested in the application of AHP in CM. Future research is needed to compare and contrast between AHP and other multicriteria decision-making methods; such work could reveal which techniques provide optimized solutions under various decision-making scenarios.KEYWORDSAnalytic hierarchy process (AHP); multicriteria decisionmaking; application; construction management; literature reviewIntroduction	Saaty’s (1980) AHP represents a popular MCDM	method	that	has	attracted	considerable	attentionDecision-making is defined as the process of determinthroughout industry, including construction, over theing the best alternative among all possible choices but in past two decades. Construction decision-making prob-practice, achieving an optimized result can be problemlems in particular, have been characterized as beingatic as decision-makers are often confronted with varicomplex, ill-defined and uncertain (Chan et al. 2009).ous decision-making problems (Angelis and Lee 1996).Al-Harbi (2001) further suggests that elements of con-Multicriteria decision-making (MCDM) is one of the struction-related decision-making problems are numer-most important branches of decision theory and is used ous and that the interrelationships between theseto identify the best solution from all possible solutionsavailable (Is¸ıklar and Buy€ uk€ €ozkan 2007; Huang et al. elements are complicated and often nonlinear. Consequently, the ability to make sound decisions is crucial to2015). Several methods have been developed to enable the success of construction activities and operations.improvements in MCDM, including: analytic hierarchyAHP provides a powerful means of making strategic andprocess (AHP) (Saaty 1980); superiority and inferiority sound construction decisions (Jato-Espino et al. 2014); itranking technique (Xu 2001); Simos’ ranking method allows decision-makers to employ multiple criteria in a(Marzouk et al. 2013); multi-attribute utility theory quantitative manner to evaluate potential alternatives(MAUT) (Chan et al. 2001); elimination and choice corand then select the optimal option.responding to reality (ELECTRE) (Roy 1991); preferenceBecause of AHP’s inherent ability to deal with variousranking organization method for enrichment evaluations types of decisions, it has been widely applied in con-(PROMETHEE) (Brans et al. 1986); and choosing by struction management (CM) research over the past twoadvantages (CBA) (Suhr 1999). These MCDM methods decades (Chan et al. 2006; Zou and Li 2010; Ruiz et al.are frequently used to facilitate the resolution of real-2012; Akadiri et al. 2013; Nassar and AbouRizk 2014).world decision-making problems.© 2018 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
However, there has been a notable dearth of comprehensive reviews of AHP applications within the CM domain with Jato-Espino et al.’s (2014) study of 22 different MCDM methods representing a rare exception. At present, no review has specifically focused on AHP applications in CM. This paper aims to fill this void and provide a deeper understanding of the decision areas and decision problems that AHP could efficiently deal with. Concomitant objectives are to: summarize the existing literature related to AHP applications in CM; identify the popular AHP application areas and problems; and provide directions for future AHP application. To achieve these objectives, 77 relevant AHP-based papers published in eight selected peer-reviewed CM journals from 2004 to 2014 were identified through a systematic desktop search and reviewed. This paper provides a useful reference for researchers and practitioners interested in the application of AHP to analyse and model construction-related decisions. AHP decision support systems and models developed for the construction industry are myriad and scattered throughout the existing literature. Researchers and practitioners may experience some difficulty locating these systems and models, hence this paper will provide clear signposting to potentially useful decision support systems and models, which in turn may trigger greater usage in practice.AHP decision-making methodAHP was created by Saaty (1980) to deal with decisionmaking problems in complex and multicriteria situations (cf. Saaty 1990; Dyer and Forman 1992). Therefore, this research is not concerned with explicating specific details about the method but rather the basic concepts of it. AHP assists in making decisions that are characterized by several interrelated and often competing criteria, and it establishes priorities amongst decision criteria when set within the context of the decision goal (Shapira and Goldenberg 2005). A key aspect is that decision criteria are assessed with respect to their relative importance in order to allow trade-offs between them.  The AHP consists of three steps: (1) hierarchy formation – the first level of the hierarchy contains the decision goal, whereas the subsequent lower levels represent the progressive breakdown of the decision criteria, subcriteria and the alternatives for reaching the decision goal; (2) pairwise comparisons – decision-makers (who are often domain experts) are asked to complete pairwise comparisons of the elements at each level of the hierarchy, assuming the elements are independent of each other. In this regard and considering the decision goal, comparisons are made between the relative importance of every two criteria at the second level of the hierarchy.Table 1. AHP pairwise comparison scale.Definition1	Equal importance3	Weak importance of one over other5	Essential or strong importance7	Very strong importance9	Absolute importance2,4,6,8	Intermediate values between the two adjacent judgmentsReciprocals of previous	If factor ‘i’ has one of the previously mentioned values	numbers assigned to it when compared tofactor ‘j’, then j has the reciprocal value when compared to i.Every two sub-criteria under the same criterion (at level two) are also compared, and so on and so forth. These pairwise comparisons are often based on a nine-point scale, as shown in Table 1 (Saaty 1980); and (3) verification of consistency – expert judgments are necessary for determining the relative importance of each criterion and any alternative to achieving the decision goal. Because AHP allows subjective judgments by decisionmakers, consistency of the judgments is not automatically guaranteed. Therefore, consistency verification is essential to ensuring optimized outcome. Saaty (2000) mentioned that to control the consistency of pairwise comparisons, a computation of consistency ratio should be performed. At this stage, decision-makers are required to revise their initial judgments if the computed consistency ratio exceeds the threshold of 0.1 (Saaty 2000). After all of the necessary pairwise comparisons, and revisions have been made, and the consistency ratio has also been found to be less than 0.1, the judgments can then be synthesized to prioritize the decision criteria together with their corresponding sub-criteria.Research methodologyThe present study was based upon the AHP literature published in eight selected CM journals from 2004 to 2014. These journals were: (1) ASCE’s Journal of Construction Engineering and Management (JCEM); (2) Automation in Construction (AIC); (3) Construction Management and Economics (CME); (4) ASCE’s Journal of Management in Engineering (JME); (5) International Journal of Project Management (IJPM); (6) Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management (ECAM); (7) Building and Environment (BE); and (8) Building Research and Information (BRI). The first six journals were deemed to be high quality based on Chau’s (1997) ranking of CM journals, while the last two journals are widely regarded as top-quality journals in CM (Chan et al. 2009). Major search engines such as ASCE Library, Science Direct, Taylor and Francis and Emerald were used to search for the keyword ‘analytical hierarchy process’ in the advanced search section of the selectedTable 2. Number of papers from selected journals.No.Name of journalNumber of papersPercentage1ASCE Journal of ConstructionEngineering and Management (JCEM)25322Automation in Construction (AIC)13173Building and Environment (BE)10134Construction Management and Economics (CME)9125ASCE Journal of Management in Engineering (JME)8116International Journal of Project Management (IJPM)567Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management (ECAM)568Building Research and Information (BRI)23Total77100journals. An initial search conducted was limited to papers published from 2004 to 2014 and resulted in the identification of 194 research papers. However, not all of these papers used AHP as a primary or secondary decision-making tool as some simply mentioned AHP in the literature review and/or recommended its application for future research. A review of each paper’s contents was then undertaken to filter out unrelated papers; 77 papers were eventually considered valid for further analysis. Table 2 shows the number of relevant papers collected from each of the selected journals. It reveals that 25 of the papers were from JCEM, 13 were from AIC, 10 were from BE and 9 were from CME, in total representing 74% of the sample. The remaining papers were distributed across the other four journals.  The next sections offer an overview of the benefits of applying AHP to construction-related decision-making problems, identifying the specific decision areas and decision problems to which AHP could be applicable or useful. Moreover, a concise review of the literature (based on the top six identified decision areas) is provided to demonstrate the versatility and worth of AHP in diverse construction situations. Where applicable, the application cases reviewed in a certain decision area are divided into stand-alone and integrated approaches – depending upon whether the AHP was used in a particular case as a sole method or in combination with other notable methods. This approach will help to elucidate upon the inherent flexibility of AHP in terms of combining it with other methods to analyse and model construction-related decisions.Review of AHP applications in CMIdentification of decision areas and decision problemsAs the most commonly used MCDM method, AHP attracts the most attention from decision-makers because of the availability of extensive literature on its application (Jato-Espino et al. 2014). It is thus essential to better understand the specific decision problems that AHP can resolve. Such an understanding would greatly stimulate interest in AHP applications within the wider areas of CM.  Table 3 presents all of the 77 identified papers and provides a quick reference guide and meaningful information about the applications of AHP in CM. The table was developed based on information extracted from the reviewed papers. First, the papers’ research interests/ topics aided the identification of the decision areas. Based upon this, AHP has been found to be applicable to many different areas of CM. Second, the papers’ research aims/ objectives presented the decision problems that AHP was used to address. This showed that AHP has been applied to numerous construction-related decision-making problems. These findings suggest that AHP is useful in enabling strategic and sound decisionmaking in a wide range of CM areas, which is consistent with the viewpoint of Jato-Espino et al. (2014). Following the identification of the decision areas and problems, the reviewed papers were then grouped, based upon the decision problems, under the decision areas. Each paper was assigned to only one decision area, thus, if a paper appears to have multiple research interests (e.g. Lai and Yik’s (2009) paper addressed both sustainability and housing/residential building issues), it was assigned to the best-fit decision area, as suggested by Hong et al. (2012). Although deciding on the best-fit decision area for a paper may seem subjective and associated with some level of uncertainty, it is believed that variations were minimized. Finally, the authors and years of publication of the reviewed papers, and other methods combined with AHP in some of the papers are also presented in the table.Descriptive analysisA descriptive analysis of the papers was also undertaken to illustrate insightful trends in the application of AHP in CM. Of the 77 papers, 14 papers were published in the years before 2007 and during 2007, a peak of 13 papers was evident (Figure 1) which appears to be a purely random occurrence given a lack of any ‘special issue’ that could easily explain it. In recent years (2009– 2013), relatively stable trend was observed with an average of seven papers published every year – however, in 2014 this trend significantly reduced. This outcome might be because many more MCDM methods have emerged in recent years, giving the AHP tight competition in terms of MCDM methods application.

Figure 1. Year-wise distribution of the reviewed AHP-based papers.
  With regard to geographical origins, the US and Taiwan accounted for the highest number of AHP-based papers published with 11 and 10 papers, respectively, as shown in Table 4. This finding suggests that the application of AHP in CM within these two developed countries is relatively more mature than that in other countries. Although some developing countries, such as China (six papers) and India (four papers), have made good progress in the application of AHP in CM, there are still opportunities to conduct more studies.  Finally, the papers were also viewed from a regional perspective. Figure 2 shows that there is a relatively large number of AHP applications in Asia (45 papers, 61%) – a finding that concurs with the earlier research of JatoEspino et al. (2014). In light of the extent of construction development in many Asian countries, it could be that the wide application of AHP in enhancing construction decisions has been significantly helpful. This wide usage of AHP in Asia should encourage other regions outside Asia to pursue AHP application in CM.AHP applications in identified CM areasTable 3 summarizes the AHP literature relating to CM and reveals that risk management, sustainable construction, transportation, housing, contractor prequalification and selection, and competitive advantage were the top six application areas. Papers in these areas used AHP explicitly for different applications and so each area will now be discussed in further detail.Risk managementRisk management is a major CM area comprising defects, misalignments and crises that can lead to inflated risks, project conflicts and other negative performance out-
Table 4. Country-wise application of AHP.No.CountryNumber of papers1US112Taiwan103UK84Hong Kong65Korea66China67Canada58India49Israel410Kuwait311Spain212United Arab Emirates213Egypt114Saudi Arabia115Portugal116Singapore117Sweden118Australia119Malaysia120Iran121Jordan122Turkey1
comes (Zheng et al. 2016). Risk management decisions are often made using multiple criteria. Interestingly, all the AHP applications within the risk management area involved integrated approaches to combine AHP with other techniques.AHP combined with fuzzy sets theorySubramanyan et al. (2012) designed a model for construction project risk assessment by using a combination of fuzzy sets (FSs) theory and AHP. During the process of designing the model, FSs were used to capture both subjectivity and linguistic terms, while AHP was applied to weight and prioritize various risk factors. Li and Zou (2011) also developed a FSs–AHP-based risk assessment method for improving the accuracy of project risk assessment. FSs–AHP was used to pairwise compare between different risk criteria – after which the pairwise comparisons were synthesized to obtain risk priorities. Li and Zou (2011) proved the validity of this FSs–
Figure 2. Region-wise application of AHP.AHP-based method to assess risks in public–private partnership (PPP) projects, by exhibiting its applicability in an actual PPP expressway project. Other applications of FSs–AHP in the area of risk management were presented by Zeng et al. (2007), Zhang and Zou (2007) and Zou and Li (2010).AHP combined with fuzzy sets theory and DelphiKhazaeni et al. (2012) used FSs–AHP together with the Delphi method to resolve the problem of unbalanced allocation of risks among contracting parties. Specifically, the fuzzy adaptive decision-making model presented (Khazaeni et al. 2012) was used to select the most appropriate allocation of risks among contracting parties. FSs were used in the model for the quantification and reasoning of linguistic principles. A Delphi team consisting of subject matter experts was employed to pairwise compare various risk allocation criteria using fuzzy values. FSs–AHP was then used to derive priority weights for the risk allocation criteria.AHP combined with fuzzy sets theory and failure mode and effect analysisFailure mode and effect analysis (FMEA) is a useful risk analysis technique, although it has some limitations. Abdelgawad and Fayek (2010) combined FSs–AHP and FMEA with the aim to overcome the limitations of the traditional FMEA-based risk management in CM. Their work (Abdelgawad and Fayek 2010) formed a model for assessing the criticalities of construction risk events and recommending corrective measures. A case study was presented, which confirmed the applicability and usefulness of this approach in providing valid and reliable risk management results.AHP combined with utility theoryHsueh et al. (2007) applied a combination of AHP and utility theory (UT) to develop a multicriteria risk assessment model for contractors to reduce risks in joint ventures. AHP was first used to weight a set of risk criteria. Utility functions were then used to convert risks into numerical rates for ascertaining the expected utility values of various scenarios.AHP combined with ontologyTserng et al. (2009) explored an approach for conducting knowledge extraction by the establishment of an ontology-based risk assessment framework for enhancing risk management in building projects. In developing the framework, risk class and subclass weights were established, which was achieved by using AHP to capture experts’ assessment of the risks. Subsequent application in a real project indicated that the framework greatly increased the effectiveness and efficiency of the project risk management plan.Sustainable constructionSustainable construction represents another popular area of AHP application in CM. In this area, both standalone and integrated AHP applications were identified.Stand-alone AHP studiesAli and Al Nsairat (2009) used AHP to develop a green building rating tool. After identifying the green building assessment criteria, the criteria were weighted and prioritized using AHP. Similarly, Lai and Yik (2009) applied AHP to identify the significant indoor environmental quality areas in high-rise residential buildings. Specifically, AHP was used to derive importance weights for various indoor environmental quality attributes. The researchers (Lai and Yik 2009) claimed that the results can assist facility managers in managing buildings within constrained budgets. Likewise, Alwaer et al. (2010) developed a sustainability assessment model to assess the performance of intelligent building systems in the construction industry. The assessment of the model was based upon the use of AHP to assign relative importance weights to different sustainability issues; the research sought to help stakeholders choose the most suitable indicators for intelligent buildings.Integrated approachesAHP combined with life cycle assessment and life cycle cost analysis. Lee et al. (2013) developed a rating system for assessing the economic and environmental sustainability of highways using life cycle assessment (LCA) and life cycle cost analysis (LCCA) as measurement methods for quantifying environmental impact and economic impact, respectively. AHP was used to weight different sustainability indexes as a means of encouraging recycling of materials, which is a vital component of a holistic sustainable development (Lee et al. 2013).AHP combined with top-down direct rating, bottom-up direct rating and point allocation. Pan et al. (2012) presented construction firms with value-based decision criteria and quantified the relative importance of these for the purpose of assessing sustainable building technologies. Different combinations of AHP, top-down direct rating (TDR), bottom-up direct rating (BDR) and point allocation (PA) were used in different cases to weight various decision criteria by pairwise comparisons. Case studies involving six UK construction firms sought to examine decision criteria for the selection of sustainable building technologies and verified the effectiveness of the method developed.AHP combined with geographic information system and Netweaver. Ruiz et al. (2012) studied the problems of planning, designing and delivering a sustainable industrial area and developed a multicriteria spatial decision support system that incorporated a geographic information system (GIS) platform, NetWeaver and AHP. While the GIS platform stores and manages geographical data in the system, the NetWeaver provides an environment for developing expert systems that provide an interface for defining ‘knowledge.’ The main function of AHP in the system was to obtain the variables’ structure and determine the variables’ respective weights.AHP combined with mathematical models. El-Anwar et al. (2010) suggested a combination of AHP and mathematical functions (such as sustainability index and environmental performance index) to tackle the issue of maximizing the sustainability of post-disaster housing recovery and construction. To help decision-makers quantify and maximize the sustainability of post-natural disaster integrated housing recovery efforts, sustainability metrics were computed and incorporated into an optimization model. AHP was used to identify the relative importance of different sustainability metrics. Mostafa and El-Gohary (2014) also presented a stakeholdersensitive, social welfare-oriented sustainability benefit analysis model to evaluate infrastructure project alternatives. A key component of the model is AHP that was used to compute stakeholder benefit preference weights.TransportationTransportation has seen various AHP applications, while MCDM methods more generally, have had major applications in roads and highways construction (Jato-Espino et al. 2014).Stand-alone AHP studiesWakchaure and Jha (2012) used AHP to resolve the conundrum of optimizing bridge maintenance using limited resources. Specifically, AHP was used to determine the relative importance weights of bridge components as a first step towards developing a bridge health index. This index can be applied by stakeholders to rank bridges that need maintenance and optimally allocate resources for the maintenance of the bridges. Dalal et al. (2010) also used AHP in group decision-making to rank rural roads for optimal allocation of funds for upgrading purposes.Integrated approachesAHP combined with data envelopment analysis. Wakchaure and Jha (2011) sought to prioritize bridge maintenance planning based on efficient allocation of limited funds. The researchers utilized data envelopment analysis (DEA) to evaluate the efficiency scores of different bridges, while the relative importance weights and condition ratings of the components and sub-components of the bridges were ascertained through AHP.AHP combined with FSs and Delphi. Pan (2008) proposed an FSs–AHP-based model to select the most suitable bridge construction method. Various bridge selection criteria were weighted through pairwise comparisons using a Delphi approach, under the following five main criteria: cost; duration; quality; safety; and bridge shape. A case study of a new bridge construction project was presented to illustrate the usefulness and capability of the model.AHP combined with Monte Carlo simulation. Minchin et al. (2008) proposed a construction quality index for highway construction by combining AHP with Monte Carlo simulation (MCS). The developed index addresses quality factors for the major components of pavement construction (e.g. rigid pavements, base course, embankment, subgrade and flexible pavements). Weighting criteria representing the relative importance of construction quality metrics on pavement performance were established using AHP, while MCS predicted the pavement life.HousingSimilar to the risk management area, all of the application cases identified in the area of housing involved integrated AHP approaches.AHP combined with Delphi and analysis of variance Hyun et al. (2008) tackled performance evaluation of housing project delivery methods by combining the AHP and Delphi methods with an analysis of variance (ANOVA) test. This approach sought to devise objective standards and contents for quantitative evaluation of the impacts of project delivery methods on design performance in multifamily housing projects. First, AHP and a three-round Delphi were used to develop an evaluation standard and calculate the weights of different evaluation items. Second, an ANOVA test was performed to explore the influences of different project delivery methods on design performance.AHP combined with sensitivity analysisMahdi et al. (2006) used AHP to design a decision model for reducing the construction cost and waiting time caused by conflict encountered when economic versus quality decisions have to be made in selecting delivery alternatives for housing projects. The effects of different criteria on the selection of proper housing delivery alternatives were analysed using AHP, after which sensitivity analysis (SA) was performed to investigate the sensitivity of the final decision to possible changes in judgments.AHP combined with geographic information system, utility theory and online analytical processing Ahmad et al. (2004) created a decision support system for property developers and builders to tackle the problem of selecting the most appropriate site for residential housing development. The system was based upon an integration of AHP with GIS software, an online analytical processing (OLAP) concept, and the expected utility value theorem. The GIS software performed geographical analyses of the available sites; OLAP analysis was performed using AHP; and the expected utility value theorem was used to convert monetary values into equivalent utility functions. An application example was presented to exhibit the applicability of the decision support system.AHP combined with mathematical modelsEl-Anwar and Chen (2013) established a methodology for quantifying and minimizing the displacement distance equivalents for families that are assigned temporary housing following a natural disaster. The methodology used AHP and mathematical models (e.g. Haversine formula) to compute displacement distances.Contractor prequalification and selectionContractor prequalification is an important task in the field of CM. This task aims at selecting competent contractors for the bidding process. The identification of AHP applications in the contractor prequalification and selection area corroborates the viewpoint of Al-Harbi (2001) that AHP is a practical and effective decisionmaking tool to prequalify and select contractors.Stand-alone AHP studiesAbudayyeh et al. (2007) employed AHP to develop a decision-making tool for contractor prequalification. Specifically, the technique was used to find the relative weights of various prequalification criteria, which were subsequently used to rank contractors to select the topranked contractor for the project. Similarly, Topcu (2004) proposed an AHP-based decision model to prequalify and select contractors based on preference ranking.Integrated approachesAHP combined with neural network, genetic algorithm and Delphi. El-Sawalhi et al. (2007) suggested a combination of AHP, neural network (NN), genetic algorithm (GA) and Delphi to analyse and improve the accuracy of contractor prequalification and selection. This hybrid approach was proposed mainly to offset the limitations of one technique with the strengths of others, and was used to collect the importance weights of prequalification criteria through a Delphi process.AHP combined with sensitivity analysis. El-Sayegh (2009) developed a multicriteria decision support model to assist owners/clients in selecting the most appropriate construction firm to deliver a project through the CM at risk project delivery method. AHP was used to establish the decision criteria and compare candidate firms, while SA was used to determine the break-even or trade-off values among different firms.Competitive advantageStand-alone AHP studiesSha et al. (2008) used AHP within a bespoke system to define and measure competitiveness in the construction industry. The system can help construction enterprises better evaluate their overall performance and improve their competence. The indicators at the different levels of the system were weighted using AHP.Integrated approachesAHP combined with cluster analysisShen et al. (2006) established key competitiveness indicators for assessing contractor competitiveness. After formulating a list of contractor competitiveness indicators, a combination of AHP and cluster analysis was applied to determine the weights of project success criteria.AHP combined with sensitivity analysis and DelphiWu et al. (2007) adopted the modified Delphi method, AHP and SA to present an AHP-based evaluation model for selecting the optimal location of hospitals. The modified Delphi method was applied to define the evaluation criteria and sub-criteria that were used to construct a hierarchy based upon which pairwise comparison matrices were established using AHP. SA was performed to examine the model’s response to changes in the importance of the criteria. Hsu et al. (2008) also presented an optimal model to evaluate the resource-based allocation for enterprises who sought competitive advantage in the senior citizen housing sector. The modified Delphi method was adopted to accumulate and integrate expert opinions to devise the competitive advantage criteria before AHP was applied to determine the importance weight of each competitive advantage criterion.DiscussionThis review illustrates that risk management and sustainable construction are the two most popular AHP application areas in CM. As Table 3 shows, risk management and sustainable construction had the highest number of papers on AHP applications (nine papers, 11.69%). While the risk management issues were primarily concerned with the effective identification, assessment and allocation of risks, the sustainable construction issues focused on improving sustainable development decisions within the construction industry. It is not a surprise to find that risk management and sustainable construction problems attracted the greatest attention in AHP application within CM. Risk management and sustainable construction are probably the most delicate areas of CM, as their activities are likely to affect the well-being of humans, the environment, and the construction industry as a whole. The presence of risk events within the construction industry could impede the success of construction operations. Conversely, sound sustainable construction decisions could help enhance human health and the environment. Thus, the widespread application of AHP for integrated and holistic assessments toward risk management-related and sustainable construction-related decisions is crucial.  AHP applications were also found in other important areas of CM, such as transportation (five papers, 6.49%), housing (four papers, 5.19%), contractor prequalification and selection (four papers, 5.19%), competitive advantage (four papers, 5.19%), plant and equipment management (three papers, 3.90), building design (three papers, 3.90) and dispute resolution (three papers, 3.90). This suggests that AHP is practically applicable to decision-making problems in a broad range of CM areas. Generally, decision-making in the identified CM areas requires thorough analysis of multiple economic, social, environmental and technical factors whose knowledge could be arduous to quantify and process. Moreover, a lack of objectivity is almost inevitable in these construction-related decision-making problems due to the need to consider subjective criteria. These may explain the reason why AHP has become popular and successful in CM. AHP can be used to validate subjective judgments and provide a high level of consistency.  This review not only demonstrates the usefulness and versatility of AHP and how it fits well into the nature of dealing with various construction-related decision-making problems, but it also demonstrates AHP’s flexibility and simplicity of application. The review results suggest that AHP is useful and allows construction decisionmakers to implement it either as a stand-alone tool or integrate it with other advanced decision-making methods to ensure a more reliable decision-making process. Also, AHP (stand-alone and integrated) has frequently been used as a method to easily identify the most important aspects of construction-related decision problems, affirming its appropriateness for such problems. Other decision-making methods (e.g. the analytic network process (ANP) and DEA) might be useful for similar purposes, however, they are more stringent and timeconsuming, giving AHP a significant advantage (JatoEspino et al. 2014). For example, although ANP is considered a general form of AHP (Saaty 1996), its ability to allow interdependencies among decision criteria makes it time-consuming and hence difficult to apply amongst busy practitioners or decision-makers.  Regarding the nature of application, Table 3 shows that AHP was mainly applied in combination with other methods, with FSs being the most common method in the integrated AHP approaches. This could be attributed to the popular belief that AHP is incapable of handling the imprecision and uncertainty involved in construction decisions and hence combining it with FSs enhances its capability (Zadeh 1965). The presence of many other methods (e.g. DEA, MCS, UT, LCCA and MAUT) in the integrated AHP approaches further indicates that the integration of AHP with other methods can be implemented in many diverse ways to conform to the nature and environment of the construction decision problem. Consequently, it would be useful if researchers and practitioners continue to apply AHP to organize, analyse and model complex construction decisions to develop more useful models to support decision-making in wide-ranging areas of CM.When and why to use AHPAHP can help researchers and practitioners explore multicriteria decisions. However, because of other alternative MCDM methods, the use of AHP often requires further justification as illustrated in some of the reviewed papers. Although this paper does not intend to provide an in-depth review of these justifications, a brief review of them could be useful for those interested in applying AHP inside and outside the CM field. Thus, the three most prominent justifications given within the extant literature reviewed are discussed below.Small sample sizeSmall sample size can adversely affect several aspects of any research, including the data analysis and concomitant interpretation of results. The major advantage of AHP over other MCDM methods is that it does not require a statistically significant (large) sample size to achieve sound and statistically robust results (Dias and Ioannou 1996; Doloi 2008). Some researchers argue that AHP is a subjective method for research focusing on a specific issue, hence, it is not necessary to employ a large sample (Lam and Zhao 1998). Others argue that because AHP is based on expert judgments, judgments from even a single qualified expert are usually representative (Golden et al. 1989; Abudayyeh et al. 2007; Tavares et al. 2008). Moreover, it may be unhelpful to use AHP in a study with a large sample size because ‘cold-called’ experts are likely to provide arbitrary answers, which could significantly affect the consistency of the judgments (Cheng and Li 2002). Much of the popularity of AHP in CM could be attributed to its ability to handle small sample sizes.  The extant literature on AHP applications in CM indicates that there is no strict requirement on the minimum sample size for AHP analysis. Some studies used sample sizes ranging from four to nine (Zhang and Zou 2007; Hyun et al. 2008; Lam et al. 2008; Pan 2008; Dalal et al. 2010; Zou and Li 2010; Li and Zou 2011; Pan et al. 2012; Akadiri et al. 2013; Chou et al. 2013). Only a few studies used sample sizes greater than 30 (Ali and Al Nsairat 2009; El-Sayegh 2009). These findings suggest that AHP can be performed with small sample size to achieve useful decision results and models, which often makes it a more preferred method in CM research than other MCDM methods. However, it is still imperative for researchers to treat the choice of AHP sample size with special attention, because the possible impact of an optimally selected sample size on the decision outcomes cannot be undermined.High level of consistencyAlthough AHP has been criticized for incorporating subjective judgments into the decision-making process, it has been proved of decreasing bias and ensuring that subjective judgments are validated using consistency analysis (Saaty 1980; Saaty and Vargas 1991). Analysis of the reviewed papers showed that this is one of the most prominent reasons why researchers selected AHP (Cheung et al. 2004; Shapira and Goldenberg 2005; Abudayyeh et al. 2007; Hsu et al. 2008). AHP is capable of using both subjective and objective data for proper decision-making. This capability makes AHP important for construction-related decision-making, as subjective judgments from different experts form a crucial part of construction decision-making (Hsu et al. 2008). This review suggests that in construction-related decisionmaking, AHP can help ensure a high level of consistency among the judgements obtained from multiple experts who might have different perceptions, experiences and understanding of the decision criteria. This paper argues that if the reliability of decision results matters, then the consistency of expert judgments also matters.Simplicity and user-friendly softwareOther prominent reasons stated for using AHP relate to its simplicity of implementation and the availability of user-friendly software, Expert Choice, for analysing AHP data (Ahmad et al. 2004; Cheung et al. 2004; Topcu 2004; El-Sawalhi et al. 2007; Hsu et al. 2008; El-Anwar and Chen 2013). These aforementioned researchers argue that AHP helps to easily and effectively break down a complex construction decision problem into a hierarchy that provides a deeper understanding of all the criteria involved. Using this hierarchy, decision-makers are able to pairwise compare the criteria, rather than assess the relative importance of the large number of tangible and intangible criteria simultaneously. This provides a structured and analytic, yet simple approach that does not require any special skills from the decisionmakers to determine the best solution.Future AHP applications in CMReviewing the literature revealed that AHP has not been extensively applied in certain areas of CM and hence warrants future research attention. In this study, any CM area where only one paper on AHP application was found is considered as an area requiring additional attention in the future AHP applications; albeit areas with more than one paper may also require additional investigation. As shown in Table 3, CM decision areas where only one paper applying AHP was found include, but not limited to, quality management, knowledge management, planning and scheduling, pricing and bidding of construction operations. This implies that more AHP applications in modelling and improving different types of decisions in these areas of CM are required.  In the area of quality management, for example, only one related AHP study was found (Lam et al. 2008). Yet, quality is a critical issue for almost all construction stakeholders and one of the key criteria for measuring project success in construction. Thus, more AHP applications in analysing quality management decisions are needed. Future research could expand on the work of Lam et al. (2008) in order to develop more decision support systems to help solve quality problems in construction projects. The development of such decision support systems should focus on incorporating and assessing not only criteria that can help achieve better quality, but also those that can help attain higher client satisfaction and higher productivity. Quality, client satisfaction and productivity are key issues that can directly affect the overall project success (Lam et al. 2008). Furthermore, future AHP applications could focus on developing quality performance measurement models to help assess and measure the quality performance of different stakeholders within the construction industry. As Lam et al. (2008) mentioned, their developed self-assessment quality management system is a ‘tailor-made’ system for Hong Kong contractors to assess and improve their quality performance. Hence, there is scope to develop AHP-based quality measurement models/systems for international contractors and other construction stakeholders to improve their quality performance.  Knowledge management represents another promising direction for future AHP applications in CM. Knowledge management is about creating value from the intangible assets of an organization and facilitating knowledge sharing and integration (Alavi and Leidner 1999). Over the last two decades, knowledge management has received increasing attention from practitioners; consequently, many organizations and individuals have developed multiple frameworks for knowledge management in different industries (Rubenstein-Montano et al. 2001). Undoubtedly, many construction organizations lack such frameworks. Accordingly, future AHP applications could focus on developing knowledge management frameworks for identifying the processes, mechanisms, cultures and technologies essential for implementing knowledge strategies in construction organizations. Such frameworks can assist construction organizations leverage knowledge both inside their organizations and externally among their shareholders and customers (RubensteinMontano et al. 2001). Although future AHP applications are needed in many other areas of CM (Table 3), the above discussion is limited to quality management and knowledge management because of brevity.Limitations of this studyThis study forms the initial phase of a literature study that has been initiated to fully review the AHP application in CM from different perspectives. This research identifies the AHP application areas in CM, but does not present application examples to illustrate how AHP can be used ‘step-by-step’ to address specific problems within the identified areas. However, the papers reviewed provide a useful reference point to understand how AHP was used to tackle specific problems. In addition, future review will include papers published beyond 2014 and use software tools such as VOSviewer (Centre for Science and Technology Studies 2018) to construct bibliometric networks to better understand the literature. Moreover, although it was relatively straightforward to use the topic coverage of the reviewed papers to identify and categorize AHP application areas in CM, the process was largely dependent on the authors’ subjective judgments. Finally, research is needed to differentiate between AHP and other MCDM methods through comparing their merits and demerits to determine which methods are superior to the others in various CM circumstances (cf. Arroyo et al. 2014).ConclusionsAHP has become a popular method for organizing, analysing and modelling complex decisions within the CM field. This paper attempted to review AHP application in CM so as to improve understanding of the decision areas and decision problems that AHP could efficiently resolve. The paper’s objectives were to: summarize existing literature related to AHP applications in CM; identify the popular AHP application areas and problems; and provide directions for future AHP application. To achieve these objectives, 77 relevant AHP-based papers published in eight selected peer-reviewed CM journals from 2004 to 2014 were identified through a systematic desktop search and reviewed.  The findings revealed that risk management and sustainable construction were the most popular AHP application areas in CM. In addition, it was identified that AHP is flexible and can be used as a stand-alone tool or in conjunction with other tools to rigorously tackle construction-related decision-making problems. Moreover, a descriptive analysis of the reviewed papers showed a wide application of AHP in Asia. Reasons behind the wide adoption of AHP are that it does not require large sample size, it can achieve a high level of consistency and it is easy to implement. Based upon the findings presented, directions for future AHP applications were proposed. To summarize, the findings suggested that AHP (whether stand-alone or integrated) can help researchers and practitioners address a variety of decision-making problems that matter. As such, construction researchers, practitioners and institutions are advised to consider AHP applications when the need to analyse multicriteria decisions in wide-ranging areas of CM arises.  This paper could be useful for researchers and practitioners interested in the application of AHP to analyse and model construction decisions. For researchers, this paper provides a comprehensive review of past AHPbased studies in CM, which is necessary for conducting future studies. In addition, this paper could help practitioners better understand and judge the usefulness of AHP in tackling specific decision-making problems in CM, which could encourage its wider use in CM. Notably, decision support systems and models developed for the construction industry are myriad as a result of AHP usage. However, practitioners may not find it easy to locate these systems and models, as they are scattered throughout the extant literature. With the help of this review paper, practitioners could readily become familiar with the potentially useful decision support systems and models, which in turn might trigger attempts to use them in practice.AcknowledgmentsThe authors are grateful to the Department of Building and Real Estate of The Hong Kong Polytechnic University for funding this research. The authors are also grateful to all the editors and anonymous reviewers whose invaluable comments and suggestions substantially helped in improving the quality of this paper.Disclosure statementThe authors report no potential conflict of interest.ORCIDAmos Darko  http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7978-6039Albert Ping Chuen Chan  http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4853-6440ReferencesAbdelgawad M, Fayek AR. 2010. Risk management in the construction industry using combined fuzzy FMEA and fuzzy AHP. J Constr Eng Manag. 136(9):1028–1036.Abudayyeh O, Zidan SJ, Yehia S, Randolph D. 2007. Hybrid prequalification-based, innovative contracting model using AHP. J Manage Eng. 23(2):88–96.Ahmad I, Azhar S, Lukauskis P. 2004. Development of a decision support system using data warehousing to assist builders/developers in site selection. Automat Constr. 13 (4):525–542.Akadiri PO, Olomolaiye PO, Chinyio EA. 2013. Multi-criteria evaluation model for the selection of sustainable materials for building projects. Automat Constr. 30:113–125.Alavi M, Leidner DE. 1999. Knowledge management systems: issues, challenges, and benefits. Commun Assoc InformSyst. 1(7):1–37.Al-Harbi KMAS. 2001. Application of the AHP in project management. Int J Proj Manage. 19(1):19–27.Ali HH, Al Nsairat SF. 2009. Developing a green building assessment tool for developing countries–case of Jordan. Build Environ. 44(5):1053–1064.Al-Tabtabai HM, Thomas VP. 2004. Negotiation and resolution of conflict using AHP: an application to project management. EngConstr Archit Manage. 11(2):90–100.Alwaer H, Clements-Croome DJ. 2010. Key performance indicators (KPIs) and priority setting in using the multiattribute approach for assessing sustainable intelligent buildings. Build Environ. 45(4):799–807.Angelis DI, Lee CY. 1996. Strategic investment analysis using activity based costing concepts and analytical hierarchy process techniques. Int J Prod Res. 34(5):1331–1345.Arantes A, Ferreira LMDF, Kharlamov AA. 2014. Application of a purchasing portfolio model in a construction company in two distinct markets. J Manage Eng. 30(5). doi:10.1061/ (ASCE)ME.1943-5479.0000290Arroyo P, Tommelein ID, Ballard G. 2014. Comparing AHP and CBA as decision methods to resolve the choosing problem in detailed design. J Constr Eng Manage. 141(1): doi:10.1061/(ASCE)CO.1943-7862.0000915.Brans JP, Vincke P, Mareschal B. 1986. How to select and how to rank projects: the PROMETHEE method. Eur J OperRes. 24(2):228–238.Cariaga I, El-Diraby T, Osman H. 2007. Integrating value analysis and quality function deployment for evaluating design alternatives. J Constr Eng Manag. 133(10):761–770.Centre for Science and Technology Studies. 2018. Welcome to VOSviewer. [accessed 2018 Feb 8]. http://www.vosviewer. comCha HS, O’Connor JT. 2006. Characteristics for leveraging value management processes on capital facility projects. J Manage Eng. 22(3):135–147.Chan APC, Chan DWM, Yeung JFY. 2009. Overview of the application of “fuzzy techniques” in construction management research. J Constr Eng Manage. 35(11):1241–1252.Chan AP, Yung EH, Lam PT, Tam CM, Cheung SO. 2001. Application of Delphi method in selection of procurement systems for construction projects. Constr Manage Econ. 19(7):699–718.Chan EHW, Suen HCC, Chan CKL. 2006. MAUT-based dispute resolution selection model prototype for international construction projects. J Constr Eng Manage.132(5): 444–451.Chau KW. 1997. The ranking of construction management journals. Constr Manage Econ. 15(4):387–398.Chen YY, Chuang YJ, Huang CH, Lin CY, Chien SW. 2012. The adoption of fire safety management for upgrading the fire safety level of existing hotel buildings. Build Environ. 51:311–319.Cheng EWL, Li H. 2002. Construction partnering process and associated critical success factors: quantitative investigation. J Manage Eng. 18(4):194–202.Cheng MY, Tsai MH, Sutan W. 2009. Benchmarking-based process reengineering for construction management. Automat Constr. 18(5):605–623.Cheung SO, Suen HCH, Ng ST, Leung MY. 2004. Convergent views of neutrals and users about alternative dispute resolution. J Manage Eng. 20(3):88–96.Chinowsky PS, Molenaar K, Bastias A. 2007. Measuring achievement of learning organizations in construction. Eng Constr Archit Manage. 14(3):215–227.Chou JS, Chen HM, Hou CC, Lin CW. 2010. Visualized EVM system for assessing project performance. Automat Constr. 19(5):596–607.Chou JS, Pham AD, Wang H. 2013. Bidding strategy to support decision-making by integrating fuzzy AHP and regression-based simulation. Automat Constr. 35:517–527.Dalal J, Mohapatra PK, Chandra Mitra G. 2010. Prioritization of rural roads: AHP in group decision. Eng Constr Archit Manage. 17(2):135–158.Das S, Chew MYL, Poh KL. 2010. Multicriteria decision analysis in building maintainability using analytical hierarchy process. Constr Manage Econ. 28(10):1043–1056.Daud MN, Adnan YM, Mohd I, Aziz AA. 2011. Developing a model for Malaysia’s office classification. Build Res Inf. 39 (3):301–313.Dias Jr, A, Ioannou PG. 1996. Company and project evaluation model for privately promoted infrastructure projects. J Constr Eng Manage. 122(1):71–82.Doloi H. 2008. Application of AHP in improving construction productivity from a management perspective. Constr Manage Econ. 26(8):841–854.Dyer RF, Forman EH. 1992. Group decision support with the analytic hierarchy process. Decis Support Syst. 8(2):99–124.El-Anwar O, Chen L. 2013. Computing a displacement distance equivalent to optimize plans for postdisaster temporary housing projects. J Constr Eng Manage. 139(2):174– 184.El-Anwar O, El-Rayes K, Elnashai AS. 2010. Maximizing the sustainability of integrated housing recovery efforts. J Constr Eng Manage. 136(7):794–802.El-Sawalhi N, Eaton D, Rustom R. 2007. Contractor pre-qualification model: state-of-the-art. Int J Proj Manage. 25 (5):465–474.ElSayegh SM. 2009. Multicriteria decision support model for selecting the appropriate construction management at risk firm. Constr Manage Econ. 27(4):385–398.Goedert JD, Sekpe VD. 2013. Decision support system – enhanced scheduling in matrix organizations using the analytic hierarchy process. J Constr Eng Manage. 139(11): doi:10.1061/(ASCE)CO.1943-7862.0000734.Golden B, Wasil E, Harker P. 1989. The analytical hierarchy process: applications and studies. New York (NY): Springer Verlag.Goldenberg M, Shapira A. 2007. Systematic evaluation of construction equipment alternatives: case study. J Constr Eng Manage. 133(1):72–85.Goodrum PM, Haas CT, Caldas C, Zhai D, Yeiser J, Homm D. 2011. Model to predict the impact of a technology on construction productivity. J Constr Eng Manage. 137(9):678– 688.Gunhan S, Arditi D. 2005. International expansion decision for construction companies. J Constr Eng Manage. 131(8):928–937.Hong Y, Chan DW, Chan AP, Yeung JF. 2012. Critical analysis of partnering research trend in construction journals. J Manage Eng. 28(2):82–95.Hopfe CJ, Augenbroe GL, Hensen JL. 2013. Multi-criteria decision making under uncertainty in building performance assessment. Build Environ. 69:81–90.Hsieh TY, Lu ST, Tzeng GH. 2004. Fuzzy MCDM approach for planning and design tenders selection in public office buildings. Int J Proj Manage. 22(7):573–584.Hsu PF, Wu CR, Li ZR. 2008. Optimizing resource-based allocation for senior citizen housing to ensure a competitive advantage using the analytic hierarchy process. Build Environ. 43(1):90–97.Hsueh SL, Perng YH, Yan MR, Lee JR. 2007. On-line multicriterion risk assessment model for construction joint ventures in China. Automat Constr. 16(5):607–619.Huang TCK, Chen YL, Chang TH. 2015. A novel summarization technique for the support of resolving multicriteria decision making problems. Decis Support Syst. 79:109–124.Hyun C, Cho K, Koo K, Hong T, Moon H. 2008. Effect of delivery methods on design performance in multifamily housing projects. J Constr Eng Manage. 134(7):468–482.Is¸ıklar G, Buy€ uk€ €ozkan G. 2007. Using a multi-criteria decision making approach to evaluate mobile phone alternatives. Computer Standards and Interfaces. 29(2):265–274.Jato-Espino D, Castillo-Lopez E, Rodriguez-Hernandez J, Canteras-Jordana JC. 2014. A review of application of multicriteria decision making methods in construction. Automat Constr. 45:151–162.Kaka A, Wong C, Fortune C, Langford D. 2008. Culture change through the use of appropriate pricing systems. Eng Constr Archit Manage. 15(1):66–77.Kang S, Seo J. 2013. GIS method for haul road layout planning in large earthmoving projects: framework and analysis. J Constr Eng Manage. 139(2):236–246.Khazaeni G, Khanzadi M, Afshar A. 2012. Fuzzy adaptive decision making model for selection balanced risk allocation. Int J Proj Manage. 30(4):511–522.Lai JH, Yik FW. 2009. Perception of importance and performance of the indoor environmental quality of high-rise residential buildings. Build Environ. 44(2):352–360.Lai JH, Yik FW. 2011. An analytical method to evaluate facility management services for residential buildings. Build Environ. 46(1):165–175.Lai YT, Wang WC, Wang HH. 2008. AHP-and simulationbased budget determination procedure for public building construction projects. Automat Constr. 17(5):623–632. Lam KC, Lam MCK, Wang D. 2008. MBNQAoriented selfassessment quality management system for contractors:fuzzy AHP approach. Constr Manage Econ. 26(5):447–461.Lam K, Zhao X. 1998. An application of quality function deployment to improve the quality of teaching. Int J Qual Reliab Manage. 15(4):389–413.Lee J, Edil TB, Benson CH, Tinjum JM. 2013. Building environmentally and economically sustainable transportation infrastructure: green highway rating system. J Constr Eng Manage. 139(12): doi:10.1061/(ASCE)CO.1943-7862.0000742.Lee SI, Bae JS, Cho YS. 2012. Efficiency analysis of set-based design with structural building information modeling (SBIM) on high-rise building structures. Automat Constr. 23:20–32.Li J, Zou PXW. 2011. Fuzzy AHP-based risk assessment methodology for PPP projects. J Constr Eng Manage. 137(12):1205–1209.Lueke JS, Ariaratnam ST. 2005. Surface heave mechanisms in horizontal directional drilling. J Constr Eng Manage. 131 (5):540–547.Mafakheri F, Dai L, Slezak D, Nasiri F. 2007. Project delivery system selection under uncertainty: multicriteria multilevel decision aid model. J Manage Eng. 23(4):200–206.Mahdi IM, Alreshaid K. 2005. Decision support system for selecting the proper project delivery method using analytical hierarchy process (AHP). Int J Proj Manage. 23(7):564– 572.Mahdi IM, Al-Reshaid K, Fereig SM. 2006. Optimum house delivery decision model from the government’s and recipients’ point-of-view. Eng Constr Archit Manage. 13(4):413– 430.Marzouk M, Amer O, El-Said M. 2013. Feasibility study of industrial projects using Simos’ procedure. J Civ Eng Manage. 19(1):59–68.Minchin RE, Hammons MI, Ahn J. 2008. A construction quality index for highway construction. Constr Manage Econ. 26(12):1313–1324.Mostafa MA, El-Gohary NM. 2014. Stakeholder-sensitive social welfare-oriented benefit analysis for sustainable infrastructure project development. J Constr Eng Manage.140(9): doi:10.1061/(ASCE)CO.1943-7862.0000788.Nassar K, Hosny O. 2013. Fuzzy clustering validity for contractor performance evaluation: application to UAE contractors. Automat Constr. 31:158–168.Nassar N, AbouRizk S. 2014. Practical application for integrated performance measurement of construction projects. J Manage Eng. 30(6):1943–5479.Ormazabal G, Vinolas B, Aguado A.~ 2008. Enhancing value in crucial decisions: line 9 of the Barcelona subway. J Manage Eng. 24(4):265–272.Osman HM, El-Diraby TE. 2011. Knowledge-enabled decision support system for routing urban utilities. J Constr Eng Manage. 137(3):198–213.Pan NF. 2008. Fuzzy AHP approach for selecting the suitable bridge construction method. Automat Constr. 17(8):958– 965.Pan W, Dainty ARJ, Gibb AGF. 2012. Establishing and weighting decision criteria for building system selection in housing construction. J Constr Eng Manage. 138(11):1239– 1250.Pandit A, Zhu Y. 2007. An ontology-based approach to support decision-making for the design of ETO (engineer-toorder) products. Automat Constr. 16(6):759–770. Roy B. 1991. The outranking approach and the foundations of ELECTRE methods. Theory and Decision. 31(1):49–73.Rubenstein-Montano B, Liebowitz J, Buchwalter J, McCaw D, Newman B, Rebeck K, Team TKMM. 2001. A systems thinking framework for knowledge management. Decis Support Syst. 31(1):5–16.Ruiz MC, Romero E, Perez MA, Fernandez I. 2012. Development and application of a multi-criteria spatial decision support system for planning sustainable industrial areas in Northern Spain. Automat Constr. 22:320–333. Saaty TL. 1980. The analytical hierarchy process. New York (NY): McGraw-Hill.Saaty TL. 1990. How to make a decision: the analytic hierarchy process. Eur J Oper Res. 48(1):9–26.Saaty TL. 1996. Decision making with dependence and feedback: the analytic network process. Pittsburgh (PA): RWS.Saaty TL. 2000. Fundamentals of decision making and priority theory with the analytic hierarchy process. Pittsburgh (PA): RWS.Saaty TL, Vargas LG. 1991. The logic of priorities. Pittsburgh (PA): RWS.Salman AFM, Skibniewski MJ, Basha I. 2007. BOT viability model for large-scale infrastructure projects. J Constr Eng Manage. 133(1):50–63.Schade J, Olofsson T, Schreyer M. 2011. Decisionmaking in a modelbased design process. Constr Manage Econ. 29(4):371–382.Sha K, Yang J, Song R. 2008. Competitiveness assessment system for China’s construction industry. Build Res Inf. 36 (1):97–109.Shapira A, Goldenberg M. 2005. AHP-based equipment selection model for construction projects. J Constr Eng Manage. 131(12):1263–1273.Shapira A, Simcha M. 2009. Measurement and risk scales of crane-related safety factors on construction sites. J Constr Eng Manage. 135(10):979–989.Shapira A, Simcha M, Goldenberg M. 2012. Integrative model for quantitative evaluation of safety on construction sites with tower cranes. J Constr Eng Manage. 138(11):1281–1293.Shen LY, Lu WS, Yam MCH. 2006. Contractor key competitiveness indicators: a China study. J Constr Eng Manage. 132(4):416–424.Subramanyan H, Sawant PH, Bhatt V. 2012. Construction project risk assessment: development of model based on investigation of opinion of construction project experts from India. J Constr Eng Manage. 138(3):409–421.Suhr J. 1999. The choosing by advantages decisionmaking system. Connecticut (CT): Greenwood Publishing Group.Tam CM, Tong TKL, Wong YW. 2004. Selection of concrete pump using the superiority and inferiority ranking method. J Constr Eng Manage. 130(6):827–834.Tavares RM, Tavares JL, Parry-Jones SL. 2008. The use of a mathematical multicriteria decision-making model for selecting the fire origin room. Build Environ. 43(12):2090– 2100.Topcu YI. 2004. A decision model proposal for construction contractor selection in Turkey. Build Environ. 39(4):469– 481.Tserng HP, Yin SY, Dzeng RJ, Wou B, Tsai MD, Chen WY. 2009. A study of ontology-based risk management framework of construction projects through project life cycle. Automat Constr. 18(7):994–1008.Wakchaure SS, Jha KN. 2011. Prioritization of bridges for maintenance planning using data envelopment analysis. Constr Manage Econ. 29(9):957–968.Wakchaure SS, Jha KN. 2012. Determination of bridge health index using analytical hierarchy process. Constr Manage Econ. 30(2):133–149.Wu CR, Lin CT, Chen HC. 2007. Optimal selection of location for Taiwanese hospitals to ensure a competitive advantageby using the analytic hierarchy process and sensitivity analysis. Build Environ. 42(3):1431–1444.Xu X. 2001. The SIR method: a superiority and inferiority ranking method for multiple criteria decision making. Eur J Oper Res. 131(3):587–602.Yu I, Kim K, Jung Y, Chin S. 2007. Comparable performance measurement system for construction companies. J Manage Eng. 23(3):131–139.Zadeh LA. 1965. Fuzzy sets. Inform Control. 8(3):338–853.Zeng J, An M, Smith NJ. 2007. Application of a fuzzy based decision making methodology to construction project risk assessment. Int J Proj Manage. 25(6):589–600.Zhang G, Zou PXW. 2007. Fuzzy analytical hierarchy process risk assessment approach for joint venture construction projects in China. J Constr Eng Manage. 133(10):771–779.Zheng X, Le Y, Chan AP, Hu Y, Li Y. 2016. Review of the application of social network analysis (SNA) in construction project management research. Int J Proj Manage. 34(7):1214–1225.Zou PXW, Li J. 2010. Risk identification and assessment in subway projects: case study of Nanjing Subway Line 2. Constr Manage Econ. 28(12):1219–1238.438 	A. DARKO ET AL.	INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT	 437