Risk analysis for revenue dependent infrastructure projectsAnthony D. Songer , James Diekmann & Roger S. PecsokTo cite this article: Anthony D. Songer , James Diekmann & Roger S. Pecsok (1997) Risk analysis for revenue dependent infrastructure projects, Construction Management & Economics, 15:4, 377-382, DOI: 10.1080/014461997372935To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/014461997372935Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rcme20  
Construction Management and Economics (1997) 15, 377± 382NOTERisk analysis for revenue dependent infrastructure projectsANTHONY D. SONGER1, JAMES DIEKMANN1 and ROGER S. PECSOK21Faculty of Civil, Environmental, and Architectural Engineering, University of Colorado CB 428, Boulder, CO 80309, USA. 2Morrison Knudsen Inc., 700 15th Street South West, Auburn, WA 98002, USAReceived 6 May 1996; accepted 16 January 1997Recent trends in the construction industry indicate continued use of alternative procurement methods such as design-build, construction management, build-operate-transfer, and privatization. Increased use of these evolving methods produces higher levels of uncertainty with respect to long term performance and profitability. The uncertainties inherent in implementing new procurement methods necessitate investigation of enhanced methods of pre-project planning and analysis. This is particularly true for revenue dependent privatization projects such as toll roads. Poor initial performance of toll road projects suggests traditional methods of project analysis are inadequate. Sustaining investor and stakeholder support of privatized revenue dependent projects is dependent upon successful ® nancial performance. Enhanced risk analysis tools provide improved information for pre-project decision making and performance outcome. One such risk analysis method is the Monte Carlo. Monte Carlo methods are especially useful in evaluating which of several uncertain quantities most signi® cantly contributes to the overall risk of the project. This paper demonstrates a Monte Carlo risk assessment methodology for revenue dependent infrastructure projects.Keywords: Project ® nance, Monte Carlo, privatization, risk analysis, computer  
IntroductionPrivatization is increasingly being investigated as an appropriate delivery mechanism for infrastructure projects (Gomez-Ibanez et al., 1991; Helm and Thompson, 1991; Schaevitz 1993; Tiong 1994a; Dias and Ioannou, 1996; ENR, 1996a,b,c). As risk exposure of project participants increases it becomes necessary to develop new approaches for determining the feasibility of projects. One example of privatized infrastructure projects requiring such feasibility analysis is toll roads. Current toll road projects have gained widespread attention for their sluggish initial performance (PWF, 1990; ENR,1995a,b, 1996d; Feldman, 1995). Although the long0144± 6193  1997 E & FN Sponterm performance of privatization projects is unknown, the continued use of this method for delivering projects is jeopardized by the poor initial results. Stakeholders of toll road projects currently rely on project ® nancial statements to make investment decisions. The information contained in the ® nancial statement generally does not include appropriate assessment of project risks necessary for adequate investment decisions in such an uncertain environment. The methodology discussed in this paper suggests improved investment decisions will follow from more knowledgeable assessments of project risks. Improved investment decisions will lead to improved project selection which in turn results in improved project performance. Improved project performance sustains future investment enthusiasm in the new procurement method.  This paper suggests the use of a Monte Carlo risk analysis technique to enhance traditional decision making methods. Speci® cally, this paper provides a background of privatized toll road ® nancing and risks, introduces the Monte Carlo technique and associated risk model, and demonstrates the process through a  detailed toll road case study.Privatized toll road ® nancingProject ® nancing is a popular mechanism for funding toll road projects. `Project ® nancing’ describes the methods which lenders use to ® nance the construction of new projects based on the anticipated revenue stream generated by the project (Castle, 1975). Toll road project ® nancing mechanisms generally include some combination of debt and equity.  Equity participation in project ® nancing includes stock purchases and general and limited partnership capital contributions. The amount of equity contribution often is indicative of the value placed on the project by the project promoter. Equity participation often determines the amount of debt the project can service, the amount of contingency available, and reduces the risk of insuf® cient funds for construction. The range of equity participation varies from project to project. Research illustrates a common equity range of 15± 30% on nonrecourse project ® nancing (Tiong, 1994b).  The most typical component of project ® nancing is debt: speci® cally, senior debt. Senior debt is that debt that is not subordinate to other loans or equity. Sources of debt ® nancing include commercial banks, leasing companies, insurance companies, pension funds, and governmental bonds.  Current toll road debt ® nancing occurs primarily through bond issues. Investment and planning decisions for toll road projects depend greatly on the ® nancial statement commonly known as the preliminary of® cial statement. The of® cial statement provides an in-depth description of the project for potential investors or bond holders of the project. The analysis found in the of® cial statement is a result of studies conducted to predict revenue and operating expenses for the duration of the bond.  The cornerstone of the of® cial statement is a summary of the Fixed Rate Senior Bonds’ debt coverage throughout the life of the toll road project. Fixed Rate Senior Bonds are the principal ® nancial component of the project. Debt coverage is de® ned as the ratio of revenue over the required debt service, and often is used by those in the ® nancial community as the basis for evaluating projects. Due to its importance to the ® nancial community, debt coverage calculations must be beyond reproach. Expected population growth, interest rates, toll revenues, operating expenses and commercial development are some of the factors that contribute to the debt coverage projections for any given year.  One dif® culty with traditional debt coverage calculations is that the values used in the various scenarios are `point values’ for any given year and do not include any evidence of how likely these values are to occur. Additionally, traditional debt coverage calculations do not identify the critical variables contributing most to project risk.Privatized toll road riskAlthough a multitude of discussions on toll road risk exist, they are generally limited to categorization of risks (Castle, 1975; Marple, 1977; Hoffman, 1989; Garnett, 1992; Woody and Pourian, 1992). Risk categories often are identi® ed with project phases. These include (i) development (technology, permitting, in¯ ation, credit, and bid risks), (ii) construction (completion, cost overrun, political risks), (iii) operation (performance, cost overrun, liability, equity resale risks), and (iv) ongoing (interest rates and currency risks) (Beidleman et al., 1990; Garnett, 1992).  While various permutations of scenarios and risk events are incorporated into the of® cial statement revenue projections, they are used only to generate one instance of a revenue projection and they are not incorporated into the remainder of the project evaluation. However, the variables used in these ® nancial calculations are highly interdependent. For example, high interest rates would affect growth in the project’s geographical area, thus causing a decrease in projected revenues. Increasing interest rates also affect the interest earnings on the project’s reserve accounts, which increases project revenues.  To develop accurate debt coverage distributions, internal and external project risks must be introduced into the debt coverage calculations. Internal risks are the variabilities that exist within the of® cial statement to evaluate the projected debt coverage for any given year. An example of an internal risk is the revenue projection for any given year. External risks are not found in the of® cial statement but may have signi® cant effects on ® nancial parameters. For example, and external risk may be the price of oil (which may affect driver behaviour) or the rate of in¯ ation (which may affect investor behaviour) throughout the life of the bond. Advanced decision making tools such as MonteCarlo address the issues of variability, criticality, interdependence, and external impacts, enhancing and extending traditional project assessment techniques.Monte Carlo risk assessmentRisk analysis: a Monte Carlo approachA Monte Carlo risk assessment is a method of evaluating all the permutations of uncertain events that might impact the projected debt coverage for each year of the project life. The inputs required for the Monte Carlo analysis are distributions for the signi® cant input variables that enter into the debt coverage calculation. These inputs are such items as the highway ridership, the toll generation, and the interest earnings on reserve funds. The probability distributions, sensitivity analysis, correlations, and external variables permitted by Monte Carlo address the shortcomings of traditional project assessment techniques previously noted.Probability distributionsIn a Monte Carlo analysis the traditional single-point estimate is replaced by a distribution of probable values. For instance, in the case study’s of® cial statement, the interest earned on the capitalized interest account is assumed to be 6.4%. A Monte Carlo based risk model allows variability for this value. For example, this number might vary between 5.0% and 7.5% with a more likely chance that it is less than 6.4%. Other key variables in the analysis, e.g., revenues or operating expenses, can be represented in a similar fashion. Figure 1 illustrates a distribution for common variables in a toll road debt coverage calculation.  A Monte Carlo analysis iteratively samples values from the associated ranges. During a Monte Carlo analysis, values from throughout the given range for each variable are used to calculate the debt coverage value for each year of the project’s life. Upon completion, a probability distribution for each year is obtained.Sensitivity analysisSensitivity analysis techniques provide guidance during the interative process of model development. Each model provides a sensitivity analysis which may be used to identify those variables that are contributing most to the overall risk level of the project. The input variables that contribute most to the project risk then become candidates for further investigation on how to narrow the range of expected values for them and, consequently, the forecast values. One-way sensitivity analysis using tornado diagrams identi® es the range of change a variable may incur given a speci® c change in that variable. Sensitivity analysis techniques in Monte Carlo are illustrated in Figure 3 discussed in the case study section of this paper. A general discussion of sensitivity analysis is provided in Clemen (1991).379Figure 1	Number of toll transactions for the year 2002Variable correlationModern Monte Carlo applications extend traditional analysis by allowing variables in the analysis to be correlated with one another. The use of correlations among the project variables allows a more sophisticated modelling approach. For example, if the highway ridership in year N is lower than anticipated, it is reasonable to assume that ridership in year N+1 will likewise be lower than anticipated. In other words, it is unlikely that a year that experiences poor ridership will be followed by one that experiences better than expected ridership. An improvement in ridership from one year to the next would probably be gradual. One can model this behaviour by correlating the ridership in year N+1 with year N. Similarly, interest rates operations costs and other annual variables can be modelled using correlation between successive years.  Some project variables are inversely or negatively correlated with one another. For example, the toll charge for any future year may be treated as an uncertain variable. However, it is reasonable to assume that if the toll rate is higher than anticipated the ridership will be less than anticipated. The inverse relationship between these variables may be modelled using negative correlation coef® cients.External variablesUsing advanced Monte Carlo techniques one can model the impact of external, global variables (or risks) on the debt coverage calculation. The in¯ ation rate is one such global variable. The in¯ ation in the general economy for any given year has a profound impact on the debt coverage calculation. The in¯ ation rate impacts both interest rates on moneys the project must borrow and on investments the project has made. The in¯ ation rate also affects the cost of construction activities and operations costs.  In summary, Monte Carlo methods can be employed to do much more than evaluate the uncertainty of the many variables that are used in the debt coverage calculation. Monte Carlo methods can be used to model complex causal and time-dependent relationships between variables. A toll road case study is provided to illustrate these extended capabilities. Case study values were normalized for purposes of con® dentiality.Case studyProject ® nancing occurred through revenue bonds to the amount of $1 720 800 000. The project franchise period runs from the start of the design construction phase in 1996 through the ® nal amortization of the revenue bonds in 2034. The of® cial statement provides ® nancial projections for three types of debt coverage; these are referred to as types I, II and III debt coverage. Type I debt coverage is simply the ratio of the net revenue projections for the year (including operating expenses) over the required debt service for the ® xed rate senior bonds. The type II coverage is similar but includes also the interest earnings from the reserve accounts for the given year. The type III coverage is the same as type I but the debt service requirements include the ® xed rate junior bond obligations. This paper addresses only the type I coverage.  Many assumptions are needed to arrive at the revenue bonds debt coverage projections. Estimates of highway ridership, toll levels, construction and operations costs, interest rates and earnings on reserve accounts are all factored into the debt coverage calculation. A Monte Carlo model can be used to test and validate the importance of these assumptions. In this study, the basic debt coverage calculation was reproduced as a computerized spreadsheet that was, in turn, used as the basis of the Monte Carlo analysis.  One proven method of developing Monte Carlo analyses is to approach model development iteratively. An effective starting point for an iterative Monte Carlo analysis is to create a simple model that contains none of the time dependent or causal relationships that were previously described. The preliminary model simply evaluates the impacts of the various variables included in the debt coverage calculation. This ® rst simple model provides a basis for subsequent more comprehensive models.  The primary risks identi® ed in this model are (a) number of toll transactions for a given year, (b) average annual toll rates, (c) annual operating expenses, (d) construction costs, (e) construction duration, and (f) interest rates. A total of 126 separate distributions were needed to represent these risks over the entire life of the risk analysis (see Table 1).Table 1	Risk categories: preliminary modelRiskNumber of asumptionsNumber of toll transactions40 (one/year)Average toll rates40Operating expenses40Interest rates4Construction cost and duration2  Four debt coverage estimates are calculated in this ® rst model. The four values are estimates of type I debt coverage evaluated for the years 2003, 2005, 2007 and 2020. The year 2003 is two years after the scheduled date of completion and represents the ® rst year it is projected that the debt service needs to be covered. Consequently, the years 2003, 2005 and 2007 were chosen to represent the ® rst ® ve years of stabilization, and presumably those of the most interest to investors. 2020 was chosen to represent the long term life of the bond.  One result that is available from a Monte Carlo analysis is a frequency distribution. A frequency distribution is a valuable aid in the analysis because it provides a visual representation of the range of possible outcomes. The frequency distribution for the year 2003, the ® rst year that it is required to pay the debt service from revenues, is displayed in Figure 2. This distribution represents the range of predicted outcomes for the debt service coverage at year 2003 for the senior bonds. Similar output is available for each of the other three other estimates.  This result shows a mean value for debt coverage of 1.3 times. The mean value of 1.3 is exactly the same as the non-risk based estimate of type I debt coverage. However, the Monte Carlo results also provide an estimate of the worst case debt coverage (approximately 1.0 times) and the best debt coverage (approximately 1.5 times).Figure 2	Frequency distributions ± debt coverage (simple model) for the year 2003Monte Carlo risk assessmentFigure 3 Sensitivity analysis ± bond coverage for the year 2003 (measured by rank correlation)  Another result from the Monte Carlo procedure is a sensitivity analysis. A sensitivity analysis indicates the variables that have the greatest impact on the debt coverage calculations. Using this analysis, one can determine which risks need further study. By spending more effort evaluating the range of risks for the most sensitive variables, one may mitigate some of the project risks. Risk mitigation is often one of the most useful outcomes from the risk model. The sensitivity analysis for the year 2003 is shown in Figure 3 and con® rms that the toll rates and number of toll transactions are the most signi® cant variables in the simple model. The interest rate on the reserve account also has a signi® cant impact, followed by the cost of construction and the interest earned on the construction fund. The operating costs surprisingly did not rank as one of the top ® ve contributors to the forecast values.  In response to the sensitivity analysis one may decide to expand the evaluation of the most sensitive variables. This enhanced risk model includes new representations of some of the original model variables plus the addition of new variables. These include modifying toll rate distribution, correlating costs and ridership, re® ning construction time and cost, and correlating in¯ ation rates with toll levels and operating expenses.  Due to their importance, the toll rate distributions were adjusted to re¯ ect more accurately the relationship between tolls and ridership. The traf® c/toll study for this project indicates that revenues increase almost linearly where toll rates are increased to a moderate level. The distribution of the number of trips is coupled with the new distributions for the toll rates by using a negative correlation coef® cient (± 0.9) between the number of toll transactions (i.e., the number of trips) and the toll amount.  Another re® nement of the model is the addition of a correlation to represent the increased costs associated with increased ridership. Increased costs are incurred with operating the toll booths when traf® c is high. Additionally, the maintenance costs for the road will increase with higher traf® c. A coef® cient of 0.5 is used to represent this relationship.381  In the enhanced model the impacts of variations in the construction schedule also were assessed more rigorously. The likelihood of attaining the schedule for each revenue generating portion of the toll road was evaluated independently. By separating the toll generating sections, individual delays in construction time and construction cost overruns can be incorporated accurately into the Monte Carlo model.  Finally, the impact of in¯ ation rates was added to the enhanced model. In¯ ation rates throughout the life of the bond will have a signi® cant effect on the ability to service the debt. In¯ ation may exceed expected rates, which in turn would affect the tolls charged for a given year. However, the required debt service remains constant for the ® xed rate senior bonds. As a result, higher than expected in¯ ation rates will have a positive effect on the project. The impacts of foreseeable variations in in¯ ation rates can be included in the model by correlating the variable for in¯ ation rates with changes in toll levels and operation expenses.  The revised Monte Carlo model yields a mean value for the year 2003 type I debt coverage of 1.29 which is slightly lower than the ® rst model. However, even though the mean value of the type I debt coverage did not change substantially, the change in the standard deviation of the type I debt coverage was signi® cant. As seen in Figure 4 the distribution of debt coverage is now slightly skewed to the right (maximum value = 1.7) but it also indicates the possibility (however slight) that debt coverage will be less than 1.0.  As previously explained, the enhanced model includes the impact of in¯ ation on the debt coverage calculations. A sensitivity analysis for the enhanced model would show clearly that in¯ ation rates have a far broader impact than any other variable in the project, due to the large number of items which are in¯ uenced by this value. To increase investors’ comfort level with this toll road project, an extended study of likely in¯ ation rates could be conducted.Figure 4 Frequency distribution ± debt coverage (enhanced model) for the year 2003Summary and conclusionCurrent alternative procurement methods include privatization of revenue dependent infrastructure projects. Increased risk exposure associated with these new methods suggests development of enhanced decision making tools. This paper demonstrates a Monte Carlo risk assessment methodology which provides enhancements to traditional investment studies. These enhancements include probability distributions, correlations, sensitivity analysis, and external variables. Results provide project stakeholders graphic bestcase± worstcase analysis and problem re® nement tools. The methodology provides a ¯ exible decision making tool for assessing the feasibility of privatization projects. Improved assessment of project risks encourages appropriate risk modi® cation, mitigation, and avoidance for highly uncertain investment projects such as toll roads.  Monte Carlo risk modelling is not without limitation. Although little can be done to alter signi® cantly the underlying risk of a toll road project, appropriate identi® cation of critical risks allows project participants to avoid, manage and or mitigate risks. However, effective model development must ® rst identify project speci® c risks. Failure to identify signi® cant risks quickly undermines model validity and therefore analysis results. Additionally, serious risks such as changes in law or government regulation while establishing boundary conditions on the overall decision process generally are so rare that they are not included in model development.ReferencesBeidleman, C.R., Fletcher, D., and Veshosky, D. (1990) On allocating risk: the essence of project ® nance. SloanManagement Review, 31 (spring), 47± 55.Castle, G.R. (1975) Project ® nancing guidelines for the commercial banker. Journal of Commercial Bank Lending, April, 14± 30.Clemen, R.T. (1991) Making Hard Decision: An Introduction to Decision Analysis. Duxbury Press, Belmont, CA.Dias Jr., A. and Ioannou, P.G. (1996) Company and project evaluation model for privately promoted infrastructure projects. Journal of Construction Engineering Management, 122(1), 71± 82.ENR (1995a) Greiner books loss on un® nanced toll road. Engineering News Record, 235(20), 12.ENR (1995b) Arizona toll plan shaky. Engineering News Record, 235(23), 11.ENR (1996a) Seattle mulls privatization. Engineering News Record, 236(1), 9.ENR (1996b) Texas to build $1-billion, 26.5 mile toll highway. Engineering News Record, 236(2), 22. ENR (1996c) Big cities book bigger jobs. Engineering News Record, 236(10), 10.ENR (1996d) Light traf® c chills Dulles debut. EngineeringNews Record, 236(1), 8.Feldman, R.D. (1995) The road now traveled: putting infrastructure privatization on track. Construction Business Review, 5(2), 38± 40.Garnett, W.A. (1992) Project ® nancing and construction.Construction Business Review, July/August, 42± 8.Gomez-Ibanez, J.A., Meyer, J.R. and Luberoff, D.E. (991) The prospective for privatising infrastructure: lessons from US roads and solid waste. Journal of Transport Economics and Policy, September, 259± 77.Helm, D. and Thompson, D. (1991) Privatised transport infrastructure and incentives to invest. Journal of Transport Economics and Policy, September, 231± 58.Hoffman, S.L. (1989) A practical guide to transactional project ® nance: basic concepts, risk identi® cation, and contractual considerations. The Business Lawyer, 445 (November) 181± 232.Marple, W.F. (1977) What is project ® nance. The Banker, 47± 71.PWF (1990) E-470 hung up-® rst nonrecourse toll ® nancing sinks as market worries scuttle syndication. Public Works Financing, November, 8± 12.Schaevitz, R.C. (1993) Private sector role in U.S. toll road ® nancing: issues and outlook, Transportation Research Board 1197. National Research Council, Washington, DC, pp. 1± 8.Tiong, R.,L. (1994a) Risks and guarantees in BOT tender.Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 121(2), 183± 7.Tiong, R.L. (1994b) Competitive advantage of equity inBOT tender. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 121(3), 282± 9.Woody, W.B. and Pourian, H. (1992) Risk assessment and options in project ® nance. Project Management Journal, 23(4), 21± 8.      378	Songer et al.      