Safety risk interactions among highway construction work tasksMatthew Hallowell , Behzad Esmaeili & Paul ChinowskyTo cite this article: Matthew Hallowell , Behzad Esmaeili & Paul Chinowsky (2011) Safety risk interactions among highway construction work tasks, Construction Management and Economics, 29:4, 417-429, DOI: 10.1080/01446193.2011.552512To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/01446193.2011.552512Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rcme20  
Construction Management and Economics (April 2011) 29, 417–429	Safety risk interactions among highway construction work tasksMATTHEW HALLOWELL*, BEHZAD ESMAEILI and PAUL CHINOWSKYDepartment of Civil, Environmental and Architectural Engineering, University of Colorado, 428 UCB, 1111 Engineering Drive, Boulder, 80303 USA Received 10 August 2010; accepted 21 December 2010Taylor and Francis10.1080/01446193.2011.552512Recent research has produced frameworks for integrating safety risk data into project schedules, visual models and other construction planning tools. Unfortunately, only a few studies have attempted to quantify base-level safety risk for construction tasks and no study has attempted to quantify the degree to which spatial and temporal interactions among tasks contribute to the potential for injury. A research study was performed to quantify the impact that pair-wise spatial and temporal interactions have on the base-level risk of 25 common highway construction work tasks in the United States. Six hundred risk interactions were quantified by obtaining and aggregating over 23 500 individual ratings from certified experts using the Delphi method. The results indicate that incompatible tasks may increase the base-level risk up to 60%. The most incompatible highway construction tasks are: (1) installing curbs and gutters and installing rigid pavement; and (2) construction zone traffic control and installing rigid pavement. Additionally, watering and dust palliatives and pavement marking is the one compatible task pair and there are 45 neutral task pairs. The resulting database and analysis have the potential to increase the efficacy of existing frameworks for integration of safety risk data with project planning tools.Keywords: Project management, risk analysis, safety.  
IntroductionOver the last 40 years the construction industry has accounted for an injury and fatality rate that is nearly five times greater than the all-industry average (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2010). Although injury rates have declined dramatically in this time, in each of the past 15 years the construction industry has accounted for over 1200 deaths and 460 000 disabling injuries in the United States (National Safety Council, 2009). In addition to physical pain and emotional suffering experienced by the victims and their families, these incidents have substantial societal costs totalling an estimated $15.64 billion annually (National Safety Council, 2009). Furthermore, it has also been shown that injuries alone account for 7.9% to 15% of the costs of new construction (Everett and Frank, 1996). These costs cripple entrant firms and have a strong, negative impact on the gross domestic product (GDP).*Author for correspondence. E-mail: matthew.hallowell@colorado.eduConstruction Management and EconomicsISSN 0144-6193 print/ISSN 1466-433X online © 2011 Taylor & Francis http://www.informaworld.comDOI: 10.1080/01446193.2011.552512  Following the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, numerous attempts have been made to improve understanding of construction safety. For example, Bernold and Guler (1993) identified common activities and physical motions that contribute to back injuries; Hinze et al. (1998) suggested a new classification method for identifying root causes of injuries; Chi et al. (2005) identified key contributing factors to fall incidents; Hinze et al. (2005a) studied the root causes of struck-by accidents; Sobeih et al. (2009) identified causes of musculoskeletal disorders; Lombardi et al. (2009) evaluated factors affecting workers’ perception of risk; and Mitropoulos and Guillama (2010) suggested a protocol to evaluate the potential for injury when constructing residential framing. Though the contributions of these previous studies are considerable, they are limited in application because they evaluate injuries, activities and preventive measures as individual issues and isolated subjects (Sacks et al., 2009).  Construction projects are characterized by complexity and uncertainty which stems from an everchanging environment. The dynamic nature of construction projects requires safety measures to be adapted to new situations. Consequently, many experts believe that injury prevention activities should be conducted early in the project life cycle (Hinze, 1997). One emerging proactive safety management strategy is to integrate safety information into project schedules (Kartam, 1997; Chantawit et al., 2005; Hinze et al., 2005a). Recently, Yi and Langford (2006) and Sacks et al. (2009) developed techniques for ‘safety loading’ safety risk data into critical path method (CPM) schedules. According to Yi and Langford (2006), the quantity of safety risk varies during the project schedule and limited resources should be allocated to projects in proportion to their safety risk at any given time. To analyse temporal safety risk, both studies concluded that safety risk data should be numerically integrated into the project schedule. Prior to these efforts, resource allocation for safety management was inefficient because resources (e.g. safety personnel) were assigned to projects for longer periods than they were actually required for (Sacks et al., 2009).  In order to effectively integrate safety risk data with project schedules, managers must identify and quantify safety risk for all scheduled tasks. Though the framework for schedule integration established by Yi and Langford (2006) only requires base-level risk data for the performance of individual tasks, in isolation, under typical circumstances, several authors have postulated that the actual risk of construction operations also depends on the interactions that occur among tasks throughout space and time (Lee and Halpin, 2003; Sacks et al., 2009; Rozenfeld et al., 2010). These studies argue that interactions among incompatible tasks may contribute to a greater risk than the sum of the base-level task risks alone. Unfortunately, no study has quantified these potential interactions.  The objective of the present study was to quantify the impact that the interactions of common highway construction tasks have on base-level safety risk levels. Risk interactions are defined as the pair-wise impacts that tasks have on each other due to task compatibility or incompatibility. Interactions were measured as the percentage increase or decrease in safety risk resulting from the concurrent performance of the tasks in the same physical workspace. The research focused on the highway construction sector because this is one of the most dangerous in the construction industry (Bai, 2002; Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2010) and highway construction tasks are limited in number and well defined (Pandey, 2009).Literature reviewSpatial and temporal interactionsTraditionally, safety has not received the attention that it deserves in comparison with other objectives in jobsite planning (Anumba and Bishop, 1997).Recently, however, researchers have begun to study the impact of site layout schemes on safety performance. For example, Shapira and Lyachin (2009) showed that crowded jobsites, resources constraints and overlap of activities may increase safety risks. In an effort to integrate safety into site layout planning, Elbeltagi et al. (2004) presented a method of modelling safety zones around temporary facilities. They used genetic algorithms to optimize the distances between facilities in order to minimize their negative interactions. Similarly, El-Rayes and Khalafallah (2005) suggested a model to consider the influence of crane operations, hazardous materials and travel routes on safety. Navon and Kolton (2006) took a different approach and showed how interactions among site layouts and planned tasks can produce fall hazards. This body of literature confirms the importance of studying risk interactions but has two main limitations: (1) the models are conceptual and are not based upon an underlying database; and (2) the interactions among tasks were ignored in the quantitative analyses.  While spatial safety management typically occurs during site layout planning, temporal safety management typically involves safety–schedule integration. Kartam (1997) made the first attempt to integrate safety data into schedules; however, as Hinze et al. (2005b) recognized, there was not an actual relation between schedule and safety resources in Kartam’s model. Consequently, Hinze et al. (2005b) developed software called SalusLink which allows safety personnel to load safety components into the schedule of a project. Taking schedule integration a step further, Yi and Langford (2006) suggested a framework to integrate safety risk into schedules using a similar method to resource loading (i.e. assigning a safety risk quantity to each scheduled activity). This framework can be used to identify periods with a relatively high level of safety risk and allows managers to use resource levelling techniques to level the safety risk in a schedule. Similar to the spatial modelling of safety, these schedule-based techniques are not based on robust underlying data nor do they consider the interactions among tasks.  Sacks et al. (2009) recently proposed CHASTE, a model that simultaneously considers spatial and temporal interactions of work tasks. By using information available in 4D geographic models and user-provided data for ‘loss-of-control events’, the method can be used to produce a 4D view of the regions of the worksite with high levels of safety risk (Sacks et al., 2009). The most significant limitation of this framework is that, in order to quantify the risk for ‘loss-of-control events’, the hazards related to each task must be identified and quantified by the user, which can be time intensive and laborious. As discussed by Jannadi and Almishari (2003), quantifying these risk values is not practical for most firms. To address the limitations in the current body of literature and to enhance the efficacy of the aforementioned safety integration models and frameworks, a database of task interactions was created.Safety risk quantificationThe prevailing methods of injury risk assessment typically involve qualitative risk ratings on either linguistic or numerical scales (e.g. Hallowell and Gambatese, 2009). Typically, injury risks are evaluated using a combination of frequency ratings, severity ratings and exposure durations. When sufficient historical data are available, safety risk can be calculated by finding the product of likelihood of occurrence and magnitude of impact (Baradan and Usmen, 2006; Navon andKolton, 2006). To date, no research has evaluated the impact of risk interactions in risk assessment. Rather, base-level task risks are evaluated individually and are rarely aggregated.  The methods used to obtain risk data and the units of analysis are diverse in existing literature. For example, Jannadi and Almishari (2003) considered risks posed by construction activities, equipment, hazardous substances and external stimuli to estimate total safety risk on worksites; Baradan and Usmen (2006) used American Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) data to analyse safety risk in 16 different construction trades; Hallowell and Gambatese (2009) quantified risk at the activity level using the Delphi method; Gürcanli and Müngen (2009) proposed a fuzzy rule based system to analyse safety risk with linguistic variables; and Rozenfeld et al. (2010) used a technique similar to job hazard analysis to identify loss of control events for 14 construction activities. As previously indicated, one of the major limitations of this previous work is that risk analyses consider activities, tasks and processes to be independent. That is, safety risks are quantified for individual tasks in isolation without considering the impacts of other concurrent tasks.Research methodIn order to develop an appropriate scope for data collection, clear definitions of common highway construction work tasks were needed. Recently, Pandey (2009) used data from literature, project schedules and interviews to identify and describe 25 common highway construction tasks (see Table 1). As will be described in detail, the interactions among these 25 highway construction tasks were quantified using the Delphi method.  The Delphi method is a systematic and interactive research strategy for achieving consensus among a panel of experts. With this technique, panellists are selected according to specific guidelines and are invited to participate in two or more rounds of structured surveys. After each round, an anonymous summary of the experts’ input from the previous survey is provided as feedback to the panel. In each subsequent round, participants are encouraged to review the feedback provided by the other panellists and consider revising their previous response. The process is concluded after a pre-defined criterion (e.g. number of rounds or the achievement of consensus) is achieved.  The Delphi method was selected over alternative research methods because archival data are incomplete (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2010; Shapira and Lyachin, 2009; Rozenfeld et al., 2010), empirical data could not be obtained during a realistic timeframe, and because the Delphi method is preferred when attempting to obtain complex data that cannot be separated from project context due to confounding factors (Linstone and Turoff, 1975). Furthermore, the Delphi method has seen increased use over the past decade for construction engineering and management research (Hallowell and Gambatese, 2010). In fact, this method has been successfully employed to enhance bridge condition assessments and predict remaining service life (Saito and Sinha, 1991), select procurement systems for construction projects (Chan et al., 2001), identify and evaluate factors affecting international construction (Gunhan and Arditi, 2005), identify components and characteristics of supply change flexibility (Lummus et al., 2005), quantify indicators for measuring partnering performance (Yeung et al., 2008), and to select contractors using qualitative measures (Manoliadis et al., 2009).Expertise requirementsThe careful selection of expert panellists is one of the most important aspects of the Delphi method. A wellqualified, well-rounded and diverse panel of experts is essential to ensure minimal bias and maximum internal and external validity. A review of literature reveals various methods to qualify an individual as an ‘expert’ using objective criteria. Though Rogers and Lopez (2002) and Linstone and Turoff (1975) are the two most commonly cited references when selecting expertise requirements, these publications offer veryTable 1	Highway reconstruction work tasks and descriptions (after Pandey, 2009)Work tasks in highway reconstructionDescriptionClear and grubClearing vegetation, debris and existing structures (e.g. abandoned utility services)ExcavationExcavating and constructing embankments and the construction of erosion control devicesDemolition of existing pavementRemoving existing pavementLandscapePreparing soil, mulching and constructing irrigation systemsWatering and dust palliativesApplying water for density and moisture control of soil, applying palliatives for dust control, and soil stabilizationReset structuresInstalling guardrails, fencing, cattle guards, delineators and lightingLay aggregate base courseFurnishing and placing one or more courses of additives on a prepared sub gradeRecondition bases (compaction)Blading, shaping, wetting and compacting the existing sub gradeInstalling flexible pavement/ patchingLaying hot mix asphalt and installing geosynthetics beneath pavementsInstall rigid pavement (concrete)Forming, pouring, floating and finishing rigid pavementHeat and scarifyingRecycling the top portion of existing bituminous pavement by cleaning, heating, scarifying, re-levelling, compacting and rejuvenating existing pavementRecycle cold bituminous pavementPulverizing the existing bituminous pavement, surfacing to the required depth and mixing a recycling agent with waterPrime, coat, rejuvenate pavementPreparing and treating an existing pavement surface with bituminous and blotter materialsSeal joints and cracksFurnishing and placing hot-poured joint and crack sealant in properly prepared cracks in asphalt pavementsInstall cribbingInstalling concrete cribbing, rip rap and paving slopes/ditchesInstall culverts, subsurface drains and maintain sewersConstructing culverts, sewers, storm drains, under drains, edge drains, geocomposite drains and French drainsInstall curb and guttersInstalling curb and gutters, constructing sidewalks and bikeways and installing median cover materialInstall traffic control devicesConstructing signs, signals, street markings and other restriction systems that regulate and guide trafficInstall water control devicesConstructing water and erosion control devicesInstall culvert pipe and water linesConstructing culvert pipe and installing of water linesInstall field facilitiesInstalling field offices, laboratories and sanitary facilities on the worksiteSurveySurveying the worksite during planning, construction and operationMobilization/demobilizationMobilizing and demobilizing personnel and equipmentPavement markingFurnishing and applying pavement markings and removing existing markingsConstruction zone traffic controlPreparing or removing lane closures, flagging, traffic diversions, cones, delineators, barricades, sign stands, flashing beacons, flashing arrow trailers and changeable message signsdifferent sets of requirements. To address these inconsistencies, Hallowell and Gambatese (2010) created a new set of objective and flexible requirements that can be used when certifying potential panellists as ‘experts’ in the field of construction engineering and management. According to this study every panellist must score at least 12 total points in the related field of research using the point system shown in Table 2 to qualify.  To ensure that the panel is well rounded and professionally oriented every panellist was required to have at least eight years of professional experience in the architecture, engineering and construction (AEC) industry. It was expected that safety managers, project managers, safety officers, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) representatives, construction safety and health researchers and representatives from workers compensation insurance providers would be the most highly qualified panellists.  More than 500 potential experts in the field of highway safety risk management were identified. Contact information for potential experts was gathered mainly from The National Work Zone Safety Information Clearinghouse website (www.workzonesafety.org),  
Achievement or experiencePoints (each)Professional registration3Year of professional experience1Conference presentation 0.5Member of a committee1Chair of a committee3Peer-reviewed journal article2Faculty member at an accredited university3Author/editor of a book4Author of a book chapter2Advanced degrees:BS4MS2PhD4Table 2 Flexible point system for the qualification of expert by Brockhoff (1975) and Boje and Murnighan (1982). panellists (after Hallowell and Gambatese, 2010) These studies found that optimum number of panellists ranges from 8 to 15. A range between 10 and 13 was targeted for this study because this number ensures an adequate population if a member defaults during the process, is easily manageable and ensures a high level of internal and external validity (Rajendran and Gambatese, 2009).     Owing to the great volume of data required for this study (i.e. aggregated ratings of 600 interactions), the authors elected to conduct the study using three independent panels with 12 or more panellists each. Two panels were responsible for quantifying the pair-wise interaction among eight tasks (i.e. 192 ratings) each while the third panel quantified the pair-wise interactions among nine tasks (i.e. 216 ratings). The task interactions were randomly assigned to each panel using a pseudo random number generator in Microsoft OSHA, Departments of Transportation (DOTs), the Excel.Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), AssociatedGeneral Contractors (AGC) and university websites.Number of iterations and feedback processInvitation e-mails that included basic information for the project and estimated time commitments were sent There are two prominent reasons to conduct multiple to all potential experts. Of the initial pool of 500 poten- iterations of surveys during the Delphi process: reachtial experts, 57 individuals agreed to participate. All 57 ing consensus by reducing variance and improving potential experts were asked to fill out an introductory precision (Hallowell and Gambatese, 2010). The survey that solicited information that was later used to number of rounds and methods used to measure assess each individual’s level of expertise. Of the 51 consensus has been seen as an indicator for accuracy introductory surveys that were received, 37 individuals of the Delphi method. The number of iterations in were certified as experts using the aforementioned previous large-scale studies ranged from two to six criteria and were randomly assigned to one of three (Dalkey, 1972; Linstone and Turoff, 1975; Gupta panels. and Clarke, 1996). Over half of these studies found  The 37 experts had an average of over 21 years of acceptable convergence after three or fewer iterations. professional experience with highway work zone safety Hallowell and Gambatese (2010) suggested that a management. Approximately 80% of the respondents study with three iterations is ideal because expert are professional engineers (PE), certified safety profes- panellists may review reasons for outlying responses sionals (CSP), or have at least a bachelor’s degree in a in the third and final round thereby minimizing related field. In addition to the professional experience several forms of cognitive bias. Thus, this Delphi of respondents, the panel has collectively authored 457 study was designed to include three initial rounds of conference papers and 45 peer-reviewed journal arti- data collection and a fourth round to cross-validate cles on safety or risk-related topics. Moreover, the the results. A description of each round is provided in panel was geographically dispersed including all major Table 3.regions of the United States except for Alaska and	A feature of the Delphi method that distinguishes itHawaii (i.e. the contiguous United States). from other similar methods is providing anonymous feedback to decrease the potential impacts of cognitive bias. Providing anonymous feedback facilitates indirectNumber of panellists communication among panellists in an effort to reach a The number of panellists has varied in previous studies high level of consensus (Linstone and Turoff, 1975; from 3 to 80 (Rowe and Wright, 1999). In fact, the Chan et al., 2001). Research has been conducted to number of panellists is affected by the volume of data evaluate the effects of different forms of feedback on targeted, timeframe of the research, number of accuracy of final results (Best, 1974; Rowe and Wright, accessible experts in the field and the capability of the 1999). These studies found that Delphi studies lead to facilitator to handle the panellists (Linstone and Turoff, more accurate results when reasons and simple statisti1975). The relationship between the number of cal summaries are included in feedback. For the panellists and accuracy of the results was investigated present study, medians and reasons for outlyingTable 3	Iterations of the Delphi processDuration (days)DescriptionIntroductory survey15Individuals were asked to fill out introductory surveys that solicited information used to objectively qualify potential panellists as experts.Round 130Panellists were asked to rate the pair-wise interactions among randomly assigned tasks (i.e. the increase or decrease in base-level safety risk resulting from compatibility or incompatibility of work tasks).Round 230Medians responses and personal ratings from round 1 were provided as feedback for round 2. Panellists were asked to provide written reasons for round 2 ratings that they believe were ≥10% greater or less than the median response from round 1.Round 330In addition to medians and personal ratings from round 2, reasons supplied by experts for outlying responses were included for consideration. Panellists were given the opportunity to review medians and reasons for outlying responses. The median ratings from this round represented the final aggregated rating.Round 4 (validation)30Panellists were asked to evaluate the median responses provided by one of the other panels. Panellists had the opportunity to accept the medians provided by other panellists or choose a new rating.  
responses have been chosen as feedback because median responses are impacted on very little by biased responses and reviewing and providing reasons for outlying responses requires deeper thinking about more complex interactions. The specific feedback provided in each round is provided in Table 3.Methods to minimize biasThe research team held the minimization of cognitive bias paramount because the validity and reliability of the Delphi process depends on the unbiased judgment of its experts. Various sources of bias may exist despite the panellists’ status as certified experts. Identifying potential cognitive biases that affect one’s ability to accurately rate risk values is essential because it allows the research team to strategically design the Delphi process in such a way that potential biases are minimized. Any panellist is likely to be susceptible to one or more of the following eight forms of judgment-based bias during the Delphi process: collective unconscious, contrast effect, neglect of probability, Von Restorff effect, myside bias, recency effect, primacy effect and dominance (Hallowell and Gambatese, 2010). Literature suggests several different methods to avoid the cognitive biases listed above. Specific controls that apply to this study include: (1) maintaining the anonymity of the respondents; (2) providing reasons as a part of the controlled feedback; (3) reporting results as medians rather than means; (4) randomizing the question order of the surveys. It was expected that these controls would reduce the potential effects of cognitive bias thereby enhancing the reliability and validity of the results.ResultsIn each round of the Delphi process, experts were asked to provide 192 or 216 ratings, depending on their panel assignments. Of the 37 experts who agreed to participate in this research effort, 28 completed all survey rounds resulting in an ultimate Delphi response rate of 76%. In total, over 5900 ratings were obtained per round resulting in a total of 17 776 ratings after the three rounds of initial data collection. The validation effort conducted in the fourth round required an additional 5900 ratings.  One of the goals of the Delphi process is to reach consensus; however, measures of consensus are not consistent in previous studies. Lummus et al. (2005) compared changes in standard deviations between rounds and conducted t-tests to measure level of significance. Another test that has been used to assess level of agreement between panellists in Delphi research is Kendall’s coefficient of concordance (W) (Chan et al., 2001; Yeung et al., 2007, 2008; Hon et al., 2010). Using Kendall’s coefficient to measure consensus is not appropriate for this study because the test is designed to measure the level of concordance among rankings with few ties within the resulting database. The data targeted, however, are ratings of pair-wise influence. Ties among ratings were welcomed for interactions of the same magnitude. Thus, the absolute deviation (i.e. average deviation from the median) alone was used as a measure of consensus, which is consistent with Delphi studies with similar data profiles (e.g. Hallowell and Gambatese, 2009).  Prior to initiating the Delphi process, the research team set the goal to reach an absolute variance of less than 5% for all three Delphi panels after the thirdTable 4 Absolute variance of responses for panels in different rounds (percent deviation)Round 1Round 2Round 3Panel 114.67%5.71%4.95%Panel 230.399.944.22Panel 334.316.421.35round with a 95% agreement in the validation ratings. The absolute variance for each panel after each round is shown in Table 4. It can be seen that the target consensus of <5% was achieved for all panels after the third round of Delphi surveys. Notably, medians did not change from round 2 to round 3.  The resulting dataset (after round 3) is shown in Table 5. Each median rating in Table 5 represents the aggregate of at least eight expert panellists’ ratings. These ratings are the percentage increase or decrease in effectiveness that result from the concurrent performance of two tasks in a proximate physical space. One should note that for each interaction, two different ratings exist in the database. Two ratings are provided for each interaction because the effect of activity A on activity B is not necessarily equal to the effect of activity B on A. For example, when laying aggregate base course and installing rigid pavement are performed simultaneously in overlapping physical work spaces, the base-level safety risk of laying aggregate base course increases by 40% while the base-level safety risk of installing rigid pavement increases by only 20%. The range of the interactions is from −5% up to 60%. The only compatible interaction is the effect of pavement marking on watering and dust palliatives (−5%). This shows that performing different activities at the same time will usually increase safety risk. For some activities, the interaction is zero, which means that there is no risk interaction when the task pairs are concurrently implemented.  As indicated, experts were asked to provide reasons for outlying responses during the Delphi process. Though there was a high degree of consensus after the three rounds of surveys, several respondents provided compelling reasons for outlying responses. For example, a few experts believed that safety risk interactions among specific tasks (e.g. mobilization and demolition of existing pavement) should be rated higher because of the concurrence of equipment intensive tasks, using heavy and noisy machinery and changing of traffic patterns. Overlap between such attributes was thought to increase the chance of spatial interference and, consequently, safety risk. Another example involved the interaction between tasks with heavy materials and noisy machinery. Such tasks were thought to impact on other tasks more than the median rating because communications among workers becomes more difficult. Finally, construction zone traffic control was expected to increase the risk of other tasks because of changing of traffic patterns.  In addition to the increases in risk interactions, some experts provided reasons why some interactions should have lower ratings. For example, one of the experts stated that resetting structures takes place primarily beyond the shoulder of the road while prime, coating and rejuvenating pavement would occur on the roadway. Consequently, it is unlikely that these tasks would have a spatial interaction. Similarly, watering and dust palliatives and pavement marking are very unlikely to be performed concurrently in the same location on a project. Other experts noted that it would be very unrealistic for some tasks to be performed concurrently due to typical construction sequencing. However, the research team purposefully did not remove any task interactions from the analysis to minimize the potential for bias from the research team and to preserve a comprehensive dataset.AnalysisBy summing the rows and columns of this matrix (Table 5), one can evaluate the impacts that each task has on the others and the extent to which each task is affected by the presence of others. The results of this analysis are provided in Table 6. It should be noted that the measures in this table are a unit-less relative measure of influence. Three activities: construction zone traffic control (7.10), installing flexible pavement/ patching (6.20) and excavation (6.10) have the greatest impact on the other activities. Thus, when performing these tasks simultaneously with other tasks, there is a great increase in the base-level risk of the other activities. Additionally, the base-level safety risk installing rigid pavement (concrete) (6.20), demolition of existing pavement (6.10) and recondition bases (compaction) (5.90) are affected most by the presence of other activities. Another interesting finding is that construction zone traffic control has the most significant impact on base-level risk of all tasks and yields the most unstable work environment. Alternatively, installing field and facilities is the most stable task because it is affected the least by presence of other tasks and has the lowest effect on other tasks.  An analysis of the distribution of interaction ratings produced interesting results. The average, median and standard deviation of all ratings were 0.17, 0.2 and 0.14 respectively. Twenty-nine per cent of the ratings were between 0.0 and 0.1, 40% were between 0.2 and 0.3 and 11% were between 0.4 and 0.5.  Another analysis was performed to identify the most significant two-way interactions. The magnitude of  
Table 6	The cumulative effect of activities on each other (relative unit-less measure)TasksTotal effects of the activity on other activitiesTotal effects of other activities on the activityClear and grub2.302.40Excavation6.104.60Demolition of existing pavement4.906.10Landscape2.603.40Watering and dust palliatives1.503.35Reset structures5.804.50Lay aggregate base course4.804.40Recondition bases (compaction)5.005.90Installing flexible pavement/patching6.204.30Install rigid pavement (concrete)5.056.20Heat and scarifying4.005.50Recycle cold bituminous pavement4.755.30Prime, coat, rejuvenate pavement4.304.65Seal joints and cracks4.203.25Install cribbing3.202.20Install culverts, drains and sewers4.904.50Install curb and gutters5.505.30Install traffic control devices5.204.70Install water control devices3.103.80Install culvert pipe and water lines5.304.60Install field facilities0.500.10Survey1.503.30Mobilization/demobilization1.101.10Pavement marking4.104.00Construction zone traffic control7.105.55  
these two-way interactions was calculated by summing both interactions for each pair. For example, if demolition increases the base-level risk of excavation by 20% and excavation increases the base-level risk of demolition by 40%, the magnitude of the two-way interaction for this pair would be 60. This two-way interaction value is a relative, unit-less measure that quantifies the relative magnitude of a two-way interaction between two tasks. Of these two-way interactions, the most significant are installing rigid pavement and installing curb and gutters (120); installing rigid pavement and construction zone traffic control (110); construction zone traffic control and sealing joints and cracks (100); construction zone traffic control and installing traffic control devices (100); construction zone traffic control and installing pavement and patching (90); and installing traffic control devices and heating and scarifying (90). Interestingly, there were 45 two-way interactions with a magnitude of zero indicating that there are a significant number of neutral interactions. Finally, there was one two-way interaction, pavement marking and watering and dust palliatives (–5), that is compatible indicating that overlapping these two tasks in the project schedule decreases the base-level safety risk. It should be noted that the actual impact that these twoway interactions have on site safety depends on the magnitude of the base-level risks.ValidationAs previously stated, the members of three distinct panels of experts and each panel were asked to provide safety risk interaction ratings for 196 or 216 interactions. The first three rounds focused on obtaining initial interaction ratings while the fourth or final round was used to cross-validate the resulting matrix. To perform this validation, surveys similar in structure to the initial Delphi surveys were distributed. In the validation round, experts were asked to review the round 3 responses from a different panel that rated a completely different set of interactions. Panellists were given the option to agree with the other group’s collective assessment or provide a new rating. In order to decrease bias, surveys were randomly assigned to the panellists. The only limitation was that no panellist was allowed to rate the same interactions that they were assigned during the initial Delphi process. Of the 28 surveys that were  
sent, 27 surveys were returned resulting in a 96% response rate for the validation. One month was allocated for this validation process and a total of 5276 ratings were obtained. Absolute variance of responses for each panels have been calculated 0.6, 1.13 and 0.9% for panel 1, 2 and 3, respectively. Additionally, medians from validation were the same as medians of each panel, which is evidence of strong validation.Application of resultsThere are several potential applications of this database to safety management and planning, which served as the impetus for this research effort. One of the most important aspects of the interaction database is its application to project schedule integration. Previously, researchers have developed a model for integrating safety risk data into project schedules (Yi and Langford, 2006; Sacks et al., 2009). This technique involves safety-loading the risk data with the project schedule using the same strategy as resource loading a schedule. This framework is mathematically summarized in Equation 1. [SF]1× n =[RIndividual]1 25× ×[X Schedule &Time]25xn	(1)where:  [SF] is an ultimate safety risk matrix and its members are total safety risk for each time unit (day, week and month);  [RIndividual] is a matrix which includes safety risk values related to performing each task individually;  [XSchedule & Time] is a matrix which includes just 0 and 1. If in time t, activity i is performing, then Xit = 1, otherwise Xit = 0.  Unfortunately, this model and available safety risk data only allow one to model the independent, baselevel risks associated with various work tasks and does not account for the influence that multiple concurrent work tasks can have on one another. With the new dataset in Table 5, each task risk can be adjusted by multiplying the base-level risk by all interaction values for all concurrent tasks. The new data from Table 5 can be incorporated into a schedule analysis using a modification of Yi and Langford’s (2006) framework shown in Equation 2. [SFTask ]1× n =[RIndividual]1 25××[RInteraction]25 25× ×[X Schedule]25× n	(2)where:  [SFTask] is a safety risk matrix resulting from performing tasks by considering interaction amongHallowell them and its members are total safety risk for each time unit (day, week and month);  [RIndividual] is a matrix which includes safety risk values related to performing each task individually;  [RInteraction] is a matrix (Table 5) which includes impact of performing each task simultaneously with other tasks on safety risk values of other tasks;  [XSchedule] is a matrix which includes just 0 and 1. If in time t, activity i is performing, then Xit = 1, otherwise Xit = 0.  In this new framework, the safety risk data, which include spatial and temporal interactions of work tasks, can be simply integrated with the schedule and the safety risk can be plotted over time. This method can be used to identify high risk periods that may not be identified intuitively. In response, contractors can attempt to consume float to level risk, take extra precautionary measures during these high risk periods (e.g. lane closure), inform workers of high risk periods and strategically design injury prevention strategies to focus on high risk tasks. When the risk profiles for multiple concurrent projects are overlaid in the same plot a manager can identify when and where safety resources should be deployed and could evaluate the risk profile for the company’s portfolio simply by computing the cumulative risks for all projects in the company’s programme and plotting the risk over time.  In addition to integrating these safety data into schedules, risk interaction values can be applied to information models. For example, safety risk data for specific construction tasks and the task interaction data can be assigned to temporal and spatial elements of the model in the same way as cost, duration, quality, material and other data. These data are essential to identify high risk locations and time periods based on the planned sequence and location of tasks. The collection and dissemination of the risk data presented takes a major step towards the creation of a safety information model. Though the dataset presented does not include tasks associated with building construction tasks as would be necessary to integrate with building information models, the research methods and framework could be applied to a future study on the topic.  Several limitations to the application of the results should be noted. First, the interaction data may only be applied to the highway work tasks as they are described in Table 1. Though these task descriptions are representative of typical work scenarios, as described by Pandey (2009), the data presented are not representative of any deviations from these standard procedures. For example, if a crane were used to install field facilities or if excavations were unusually deep, the magnitude of any task interactions associated with these deviations may no longer be accurate. This limitation was essential because adding new criteria to the Delphi survey would have resulted in an overwhelming burden to the panellists, each of whom had already been asked to provide 1800 ratings over the course of three rounds of surveys. Because of this limitation, the writers suggest future research on the impacts of relevant subtasks, alternative means and methods, and specialty equipment. The second major limitation is that these data should only be applied to daytime construction on projects in the contiguous United States. The limitation must be imposed because the Delphi panellists only had significant experience in the contiguous United States and construction deviates significantly from standard means and methods when work is performed at night. Finally, the data must be applied with the understanding that the task descriptions are general in nature and do not reference specific design features, environmental conditions, crew capabilities and competencies, or any other project-specific characteristics.Conclusions and study limitationsThe research objective was to quantify the pair-wise safety interactions among 25 highway construction work tasks that result from task compatibility or incompatibility using the Delphi method. After three iterations of Delphi surveys with three separate panels, consensus was achieved. In a fourth and final round, the results were successfully cross-validated.  The results of this research indicate that construction zone traffic control, installing flexible pavement/patching and excavation have the greatest impact on the base-level risk of other construction activities. In contrast, installing rigid pavement (concrete), demolition of existing pavement and reconditioning bases (compaction) are affected most by other concurrent activities. Though the pair-wise data are interesting and valuable on their own, the most significant contribution is that these data can be effectively integrated with cost, schedule and quality planning. As discussed, the database produced can be attached, along with base-level safety risk data to common highway construction work tasks in a project schedule thereby allowing a manager to ‘safety-risk-load’ a project schedule in the same way one would resource load a schedule. The risk interaction data can be used to more accurately quantify temporal safety risk on projects with many concurrent tasks. The resulting temporal plot includes the baselevel safety risk and the influence that multiple concurrent work activities have on each other’s risk level. Though it may be unrealistic to separate concurrent construction tasks, such an analysis may yield more accurate and reliable temporal risk analyses. Being able to proactively identify high risk periods and communi-427cate risks with construction crews is very important for successful safety management.  There are several limitations of this research. First, though several controls were implemented to enhance the rigour of the study and to promote the validity and reliability of the results, there are inherent limitations associated with quantifying risk-related information using expert ratings. Second, the pair-wise interaction database is limited to only 25 tasks (600 interactions). The creation of a sufficiently representative and robust database would require the quantification of many more task interactions, including building construction tasks. Thus, additional research in this area is suggested. Third, these task interactions apply to the construction environment at the time that the study was conducted. Therefore, if common construction tasks were to change due to the implementation of technological innovations or new means and methods the pair-wise interactions and base-level risk must be re-evaluated. Fourth, the assumption made in this research is that the tasks are performed as described in Table 1 and that this performance is consistent throughout the industry. Satisfying this assumption requires competent and capable crews with sufficient leadership and management control. The authors recognize, however, that construction sites are composed of a spectrum of crews with different levels of safety experience, competencies and capabilities. Therefore, the safety interaction risks presented here are average for the industry and can be varied for different projects and crews. Finally, this research does not consider the impacts of environmental risk factors such as weather or light conditions, the safety programme of the contractor or productivity pressure from top managers. Despite these limitations, the resulting database makes a significant contribution to the body of knowledge which can be used to enhance project management capabilities through the integration of safety with other project management functions.ReferencesAnumba, C. and Bishop, G. (1997) Importance of safety considerations in site layout and organization. Canadian Journal of Civil Engineering, 24(2), 229–36.Bai, Y. (2002) Improving highway work zone safety, in Proceedings, ASCE (Texas section), Waco, Texas, 2–5 October,  pp. 1–10.Baradan, S. and Usmen, M.A. (2006) Comparative injury and fatality risk analysis of building trades. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 132(5), 533–9.Bernold, L.E. and Guler, N. (1993) Analysis of back injuries in construction. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 119(3), 607–21.Best, R.J. (1974) An experiment in Delphi estimation in marketing decision making. Journal of Marketing Research, 11(1), 448–52.Boje, D.M. and Murnighan, J.K. (1982) Group confidence pressures decisions. Management Science, 28(1), 1187–96.Brockhoff, K. (1975) The performance of forecasting groups in computer dialogue and face-to-face discussion, in The Delphi Method: Techniques and Applications, Addison Wesley, Reading, MA, pp. 291–321.Bureau of Labor Statistics (2010) National census of fatal occupational injuries in 2009, available at http:// www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/cfoi.pdf (accessed 12 January 2010).Chan, A.P.C., Yung, E.H.K., Lam, P.T.I., Tam, C.M. and Cheung, S.O. (2001) Application of Delphi method in selection of procurement systems for construction projects. Construction Management and Economics, 19, 699–718.Chantawit, D., Hadikusumo, B.H.W., Charoenngam, C. and Rowlinson, S. (2005) 4DCAD-safety: visualizing project scheduling and safety planning. Construction Innovation, 5(2), 99–114.Chi, C., Changa, T. and Ting, H. (2005) Accident patterns and prevention measures for fatal occupational falls in the construction industry. Applied Ergonomics, 36, 391–400.Dalkey, N. (1972) An elementary cross-impact model. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 3, 341–51.Elbeltagi, E., Hegazy, A.H. and Eldosoky, A. (2004) Dynamic layout of construction temporary facilities considering safety. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 130(4), 1186–95.El-Rayes, K. and Khalafallah, A. (2005) Trade-off between safety and cost in planning construction site layouts. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 131(11), 534–41.Everett, J.G. and Frank, P.B. (1996) Costs of accidents and injuries due to the construction industry. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 122(2), 158–64.Gunhan, S. and Arditi, D. (2005) Factors affecting international construction. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 131(3), 273–82.Gupta, U.G. and Clarke, R.E. (1996) Theory and applications of the Delphi technique: a bibliography (1975– 1994). Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 53(2), 185–211.Gürcanli, G.E. and Müngen, U. (2009) An occupational safety risk analysis method at construction sites using fuzzy sets. International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, 39(2), 371–87.Hallowell, M.R. and Gambatese, J.A. (2009) Activity-based safety and health risk quantification for formwork construction. ASCE Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 135(10), 990–8.Hallowell, M.R. and Gambatese, J.A. (2010) Qualitative research: application of the Delphi method to CEM research. ASCE Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 136(1), 99–107.Hinze, J. (1997) Construction Safety, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.Hallowell Hinze, J., Pedersen, C. and Fredley, J. (1998) Identifying root causes of construction injuries. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 124(1), 67–71.Hinze, J., Huang, X. and Terry, L. (2005a) The nature of struck-by accidents. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 131(2), 262–8.Hinze, J., Nelson, J. and Evans, R. (2005b) Software integration of safety in construction schedules. Paper presented at the 4th Triennial International Conference, Rethinking and Revitalizing Construction Safety, Health, Environment and Quality, Port Elizabeth, South Africa, 16–17 May.Hon, C.K.H., Chan, A.P.C. and Wong, F.K.W. (2010) An analysis for the causes of accidents of repair, maintenance, alteration and addition works in Hong Kong. Safety Science, 48, 894–901.Jannadi, O. and Almishari, S. (2003) Risk assessment in construction. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 129(5), 492–500.Kartam, N. (1997) Integrating safety and health performance into construction CPM. ASCE Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 123(2), 121–6.Lee, S. and Halpin, D. (2003) Predictive tool for estimating accident risk. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 129(4), 431–6.Linstone, H. and Turoff, M. (1975) The Delphi Method: Techniques and Applications, Addison Wesley, Reading, MA.Lombardi, D.A., Verma, S.K., Brennana, M.J. and Perry, M.J. (2009) Factors influencing worker use of personal protective eyewear. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 41, 755–62.Lummus, R.R., Vokurkaz, R.J. and Duclos, L.K. (2005) Delphi study on supply chain flexibility. International Journal of Production Research, 43(13), 2687–708.Manoliadis, O.G., Pantouvakis, J. and Christodoulou, S.E. (2009) Improving qualifications-based selection by use of the fuzzy Delphi method. Construction Management and Economics, 27, 373–84.Mitropoulos, P. and Guillama, V. (2010) Analysis of residential framing accidents, activities, and task demands. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 136(2), 260–9.National Safety Council (2009) Accident Facts, IV, National Safety Council, Itasca, IL.Navon, R. and Kolton, O. (2006) Model for automated monitoring of fall hazards in building construction. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 132(7), 733–40.Pandey, S. (2009) Risk quantification for highway reconstruction activities, Masters thesis, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO.Rajendran, S. and Gambatese, J.A. (2009) Development and initial validation of sustainable construction safety and health rating system. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 135(10), 1067–75.Rogers, M.R. and Lopez, E.C. (2002) Identifying critical cross-cultural school psychology competencies. Journal of School Psychology, 40(2), 115–41.Rowe, G. and Wright, G. (1999) The Delphi technique as a forecasting tool: issues and analysis. International Journal of Forecasting, 5, 353–75.Rozenfeld, O., Sacks, R., Rosenfeld, Y. and Baum, H. (2010) Construction job safety analysis. Safety Science, 48, 491–8.Sacks, R., Rozenfeld, O. and Rosenfeld, Y. (2009) Spatial and temporal exposure to safety hazards in construction. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 135(8), 726–36.Saito, M. and Sinha, K. (1991) Delphi study on bridge condition rating and effects of improvements. Journal of Transportation Engineering, 117(3), 320–34.Shapira, A. and Lyachin, B. (2009) Identification and analysis of factors affecting safety on construction sites with tower cranes. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 135(1), 24–33.Sobeih, T., Salem, O., Genaidy, A., Abdelhamid, T. and Shell, R. (2009) Psychosocial factors and musculoskeletal429disorders in the construction industry. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 135(4), 267–77.Yeung, J.F.Y., Chan, A.P.C., Chan, D.W.M. and Li, L.K. (2007) Development of a partnering performance index (PPI) for construction projects in Hong Kong: a Delphi study. Construction Management and Economics, 25, 1219–37.Yeung, J.F.Y., Chan, A.P.C. and Chan, D.W.M. (2008) Establishing quantitative indicators for measuring the partnering performance of construction projects in Hong Kong. Construction Management and Economics, 26, 277–301.Yi, K. and Langford, D. (2006) Scheduling-based risk estimation and safety planning for construction projects. Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 132(6), 626–35.      418	Hallowell et al.  Safety risk management	419    426	et al.  Safety risk management  426	et al.  