Service quality performance of design/build contractors using quality function deploymentDavid Arditi & Dong‐Eun LeeTo cite this article: David Arditi & Dong‐Eun Lee (2004) Service quality performance of design/build contractors using quality function deployment, Construction Management and Economics, 22:2, 123-127, DOI: 10.1080/0144619042000201321To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/0144619042000201321Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rcme20
Construction Mangement and Economics (February 2004) 22, 123–127	NOTEService quality performance of design/build contractors using quality function deploymentDAVID ARDITI* and DONG-EUN LEEIllinois Institute of Technology, Department of Civil and Architectural Engineering, Construction Engineering and Management Program, Chicago, IL 60616, USAReceived 14 February 2003; accepted 20 November 2003This note describes a model that measures the quality of the project service of a D/B firm using quality function deployment (QFD). This model is an add-on to a model developed previously by the authors to measure the corporate service quality performance of D/B firms. The project service quality performance model makes use of 10 service quality factors and their relative weights (transferred from the corporate service quality performance model), three components of quality management systems in place in D/B projects (ranked by senior managers in D/B firms) and the relationships between service quality factors and quality system requirements (established by a professional quality system assessor). It uses QFD to calculate a quality performance index. The combined corporate and project service quality performance index can be used by D/B firms to benchmark themselves against their competitors or to monitor their own performance. It can also be used by owners to rank D/B firms relative to their service quality performance.Keywords: Project service quality, design/build construction, quality function deploymentIntroductionIf a project can be defined as a temporary endeavour undertaken to create a unique product, the project that is delivered by a D/B firm can be considered to be a unique entity consisting of product (e.g. building, cement plant, etc.) and service (at corporate and project levels). Previous research focused on measuring the service quality performance of D/B firms at the corporate level (Arditi and Lee, 2003), whereas this research focuses on measuring the service quality performance at the project level. The outcome of these two studies is a tool that measures the service quality performance (at the corporate and project levels) of D/B firms.  The tool combines experience captured from three expert pools that consist of construction owners, senior managers in D/B firms and a quality system assessor who has extensive experience with D/B firms andprojects. The measurement is conducted by performing QFD on data that measure: (1) the needs and expectations of construction owners as transferred from a model developed in previous research, (2) the strength of the relationship between service quality factors and quality management system components at the project level, and (3) the pursued and implemented quality management system in place in D/B projects.Measuring project service quality performanceThe model developed to measure service quality performance at the project level makes use of ten service quality factors and three quality management system components (see the right most data matrix in Figure 1). The ten service quality factors used in this study were adapted from the original ten dimensions*Author for correspondence. E-mail: arditi@iit.eduidentified by Parasuraman et al. (1985). These factorsConstruction Management and EconomicsISSN 0144-6193 print/ISSN 1466-433X online © 2004 Taylor & Francis Ltd http://www.tandf.co.uk/journalsDOI: 10.1080/0144619042000201321124	Arditi and LeeFigure 1	Service quality performance measurement modelService quality performance of D/B contractors	125Table 1	Project quality management system components (modified from PMI standards)ComponentsDefinitionsQuality planningIdentifying which quality standards are relevant to the project and determining how to satisfy themQuality assuranceEvaluating overall project performance on a regular basis to provide confidence that the project will satisfy the relevant quality standardsQuality controlMonitoring specific project results to determine if they comply with relevant quality standards and identifying ways to eliminate the causes of unsatisfactory performance
are defined and discussed in detail by Arditi and Lee (2003).  The quality management system components at the project level are identified from criteria used in Project Management Institute (PMI) standards and include quality planning, quality assurance, and quality control (PMI, 2000). A list of the project quality management system components and their definitions are presented in Table 1.  The quality of a project is measured by its conformance to a quality plan (QP) that is designed to satisfy a customer. Quality assurance (QA) in a construction project involves establishing a programme that will maintain effective quality procedures for the entire duration of the construction project to prevent, correct, identify, segregate and control non-conformities whether they are procedure-related, service-related or product-related. A QA programme includes deciding what has to be measured and who measures it (Kagan, 1989). Quality control (QC), on the other hand, involves the actual measuring of the conformance of activities to standards previously set in the quality plan. Therefore, the effectiveness of the QP, QA and QC programmes in a project will reflect on the entire project quality performance as defined by PMI (2000). The project service quality performance is associated with the level of proficiency with which the project quality management system processes – QP, QA and QC – are carried out in the project. Although these processes interact and at times overlap with each other, they consist of and include all activities required to ensure that the project will satisfy the quality requirements (PMI, 2000).MethodologyQFD is defined as ‘a technique to deploy customer requirements into design characteristics and deploy them into subsystems, components, materials and production processes’ (Hoyle, 1998). The senior executives of D/B firms and an independent assessor of quality systems contributed to the research as these parties are directly involved in administering and assessing corporate quality in D/B firms. The elements of QFD are discussed in a systematic way by Arditi and Lee (2003).  The project service quality performance measurement model shown in Figure 1 uses QFD. The details related to the left part of the model that corresponds to the measurement of service quality performance at the corporate level are described by Arditi and Lee (2003). The details of the attributes and the data processing for the right part of the model that corresponds to the measurement of service quality at the project level are as follows:• Column : this column includes 10 ‘service quality factors’ that were modified from the 10 dimensions identified in Parasuraman et al.’s (1985) conceptual model developed after an extensive study of service industries. These factors represent customers’ quality requirements, and their brief descriptions are presented by Arditi and Lee (2003). The relative importance rates of service quality factors were reported by construction owners in a questionnaire survey on a scale of 1 to 10, where 1 represents ‘not important’ and 10 ‘extremely important’, and then the normalized weights of these service quality factors were calculated (Arditi and Lee, 2003) and transferred to Column  in this model.• Row : this row includes three ‘quality management system components at the project level’, which were adapted from the project quality management system provided by PMI (PMI, 2000). They represent the technical characteristics with which D/B projects’ activities are expected to meet D/B construction owners’ requirements at the project level. Their brief descriptions are presented in Table 1. The relative importance of quality management system components in place at the project level of D/B firms, was reported by senior executives in D/B firms in a questionnaire survey on a scale of 1 to 10, where 1 represents ‘not important’ and 10 ‘extremely important’.• Matrix : this matrix represents the strength of the relationships between the construction owner’s needs and expectations with respect to service quality factors (column ) and the quality management system components in place at the project level of D/B firms (row ). This information was obtained from a quality management system assessor (i.e. an independent third party)126	Arditi and Leeby means of a survey instrument on a scale of 0 to 5 where 0 represents ‘no relationship’ and 5 ‘perfect (one-on-one) relationship’.• Column : this column represents the status of service quality factors under perfect conditions (i.e. they all score a maximum 5).• Row : this row features normalized importance weights for quality management system components at the project level.• Row : this row represents the status of project quality management system components under perfect conditions (i.e. they all score a maximum 5).• Matrix : the point scores (Rij) were calculated by the synthesis of the information in attributes,,, and .• Cell : the maximum level of service quality performance at the project level under perfect conditions is calculated using the procedure defined by Arditi and Lee (2003).• Column 	: this column represents the status of service quality factors under actual conditions in a particular D/B project, as assigned by construction owners.• Row  : this row represents the status of project quality management system components under actual conditions in a particular D/B project, as reported by a quality management system assessor.• Matrix : the point scores (Rij) were calculated by the synthesis of the information in attributes,,,	 and  .• Cell : the actual level of service quality performance at the project level under actual conditions is calculated using the procedure defined by Arditi and Lee (2003).Questionnaire surveys were conducted of 126 senior executives of D/B firms listed in the database of the Design Build Institute of America (DBIA), and a quality system assessor. The details of these surveys are reported by Arditi and Lee (2003).  The relative importance of quality performance at the corporate and project levels were prioritized by the three parties, construction owners, senior managers in D/B firms and the quality management system assessor. The score ranged from 1 to 10, where 1 is ‘not important’ and 10 ‘very important’.FindingsThe data collected through the two surveys administered to senior executives of D/B firms and the quality management system assessor with experience in D/B projects (corresponding to the top-right matrix in Figure 1) were processed to get Process Matrix 1 (corresponding to the middle-right matrix in Figure 1). Given the data collected in the three surveys described earlier, the maximum level of performance (Max LP) expected in the D/B industry is calculated as 23.00 (bottom right corner cell  in Process Matrix 1).  As an example, let us now assume that a construction owner who engages a D/B firm wants to assess the service quality performance in this project. If the quality system assessors hired by the D/B construction owner rate the status of the quality management system components in place in the D/B project being investigated (recorded in the status row   of Process Matrix 2 in Figure 1) and the D/B construction owner defines his/ her needs by assigning ratings (recorded in the status column 	 of Process Matrix 2 in Figure 1) based on the particular project’s requirements, it is possible to calculate the actual level of performance (Actual LP) expected in the case of the D/B project in question as 20.92 (bottom right corner cell  in Process Matrix 2 in Figure 1). The quality performance index (QPI) of the project in this example is obtained as follows (last step in the right column of Figure 1).Actual LP	QPIProj =	× 100%Max LPValue in right bottomcell in Process Matrix 2=Value in right bottomcell in Process Matrix 1× 100%= × 100= 90.95%In the example presented by Arditi and Lee (2003), the corporate service quality performance was measured for a D/B firm and QPICorp was found to be 93.68%. If the example project described above is carried out by the very same D/B firm, then the combined service quality performance (at the corporate and project levels) can be calculated by making use of the average weights specified in the surveys by owners, D/B executives and the quality system assessor (WCorp = 49.52% and WProj = 50.48%).QPIService = (WCorp × QPICorp ) + (WProj × QPIProj)	= 49.52(	% × 93.68) + (50.48% × 90.95)= 92.30%Service quality performance of D/B contractors	127It is desirable for the performance index to be as close to 100% as possible. The real benefit of the QPIService becomes apparent when a construction owner compares the QPIService of different D/B firms. The QPIProj is of value to individual D/B firms who can use it to compare their performance in different projects and take measures to maximize their QPIService in future projects. They can also benchmark themselves against their competitors.  The project and corporate service quality performance measurement tools are designed as a relational database system using quality function deployment (Doukas et al., 1995; Sriraman et al., 1990). The process matrices 1 and 2 described in Figure 1 are calculated by means of an integrated system designed as an Excel spreadsheet.ConclusionThe service quality performance measurement model reported in this note was developed as an answer to the need for better quality monitoring in D/B projects. The first step in this study was a service quality performance measurement model that works at the corporate level (Arditi and Lee, 2003). The add-on step involves a service quality performance measurement tool for the D/B project and is reported in the preceding sections. The service quality performance measurement model can be used by a construction owner as a part of aqualification system to rank D/B firms in terms of their service quality performance.  The quality audits and assessments conducted by D/B firms, the owner and third parties such as ISO 9000 quality management system auditing and consulting firms can have greater impact when used in association with the tool described in this note, which in turn is expected to lead to higher efficiency levels of quality management in D/B construction. Furthermore, the systematization of service quality performance measurement on an industry-wide basis facilitates the diffusion of quality management information among the parties involved in construction.  This quality performance measurement tool is applicable only to D/B firms and projects, since the surveys that investigate owners’ needs and expectations and construction executives’ views have been conducted only for this type of organization. Future research should include the development of a tool that measures the quality performance of the constructed facility.ReferencesArditi, D. and Lee, D.-E. (2003) Assessing the corporate service quality performance of design/build contractors using quality function deployment. Construction Management and Economics, 21(2), 175–85.DBIA (1998) Design Build Institute of America: TheIntegrated Service Association website, available at http:// www.DBIA.org.Doukas, L., William, P.W. and Jeyaratnam, C. (1995)Integrating quality factors into system design, in Proceedings of the 1995 IEEE International Engineering Management Conference, pp. 235–40.Hoyle, D. (1998) ISO 9000 Quality Systems Handbook, 3rd edn, Butterworth Heinemann Ltd.Kagan, H.A. (1989) Practical quality-controlled construction. Journal of Performance of Constructed Facilities, ASCE, 3(3), 191–8.Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V.A. and Berry, L.L. (1985) A conceptual model of service quality and its implications for future research. Journal of Marketing, 49(Fall), 41–50.PMI: Project Management Institute (2000) A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge, Project Management Institute, Upper Darby, PA.Sriraman, V., Tosirisuk, P. and Chu, H.W. (1990) Object oriented databases for quality function deployment and Taguchi methods. Computers and Industrial Engineering, 19(1–4), 285–90.