The changing role of builders merchants in the construction supply chainAndrew Agapiou , Roger Flanagan , George Norman & David NotmanTo cite this article: Andrew Agapiou , Roger Flanagan , George Norman & David Notman(1998) The changing role of builders merchants in the construction supply chain, ConstructionManagement & Economics, 16:3, 351-361, DOI: 10.1080/014461998372376To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/014461998372376Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rcme20  
Construction Management and Economics (1998) 16, 351± 361The changing role of builders merchants in the construction supply chainANDREW AGAPIOU1, ROGER FLANAGAN1, GEORGE NORMAN2 and DAVID NOTMAN21Department of Construction Management & Engineering, University of Reading, PO Box 219, Whiteknights, Reading, RG6 6AW, UK.2Department of Economics, University of Edinburgh, William Robertson Building, 50 George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9JY, UKReceived 3 June 1996; accepted 14 February 1997Builders merchants are an integral part of the construction industry, yet rarely are they consulted when discussions take place on the future of the construction industry. Throughout history, builders merchants have played a dominant role in the construction industry, initially as an intermediary between the artisan and the buyer, and more recently as a source of working capital for contracting ® rms. The merchanting industry currently is undergoing considerable change. The depressed construction market and the failure of the housing repair and maintenance sector to recover in the ® rst half of the 1990’s as activity in the private non-housing repair and maintenance sector has increased, has raised competition between merchants. The major building merchants are becoming larger by acquisition and merger, the smaller merchants are seeking niche areas, and the medium-size ® rms are under serious threat from acquisition by the larger merchanting ® rms. The trend towards consolidation in the sector, driven by the need to reduce costs, has meant that the large merchanting ® rms now control around 60% of the building materials market sales. Factoring is a growing trend, particularly with smaller companies sourcing goods from the cheapest source. The larger merchants have to respond by sourcing goods from the lowest cost base, irrespective of whether they buy from overseas markets. This paper analyses the UK builders merchants sector and evaluates the important role played in the supply chain.Keywords: Building materials, builders’ merchants, components, imports  
IntroductionA number of major studies, including the Technology Foresight report and the Latham report (Latham, 1994) have highlighted the need for the construction industry to be more competitive and to aim to reduce construction costs by 30%. Construction organizations would argue that tender prices already have reduced by 24% in real terms since 1990 and that the pro® t margin on construction work is 1± 2% of the construction price. There are many areas for consideration, e.g.: avoiding over-speci® cation; focusing on the interface between design and construction; using more standard and pre-assembled components; involving suppliers in0144± 6193  1998 E & FN Sponthe design process; and using more off-site manufacturing and assembly.  Many of the suggestions for savings are in¯ uenced strongly by the supply chain; there are opportunities to save on the cost of materials and components in the chain. However, very little consideration has been given to the role of builders’ merchants in the supply chain and the role that they can play in helping to reduce construction costs by 30%.  Any ® rm seeking to acquire materials and components at the best price on the best terms and conditions needs to understand the structure of the supplying industries. Supply terms include price, discounts, reliability and timing of deliveries, and, importantly, the credit facilities for payment. Industry, in providing credit facilities to smaller construction companies, provides a lifeline for funding projects. The importance of the merchanting industry in providing the credit facility for many smaller organizations often is overlooked.  The aim of this paper is to investigate the important part played by builders merchants in the supply process and to discuss their changing role in the construction industry. Recommendations are made to consider the contribution the merchanting industry can make towards the industry achieving signi® cant reductions in construction costs.  
Figure 1 Total overseas trade in construction related materials and components, 1982± 95 (Flanagan et al., 1995)  
Materials usageMaterials constitute a large proportion of the total cost of construction: the exact proportion varies from project to project, as shown in Table 1. Typically, materials account for 40± 45% of the cost of all construction work; this percentage will be much lower in repair and maintenance projects, but appreciably higher for some new large building projects with a high environmental engineering services component.Sources of materials and components ± the imports problemThe UK has a serious problem in the construction related materials and component supply industries. UK companies are not producing the goods needed by the construction industry, and many are now sourced from overseas. The trade de® cit (imports minus exports) in construction related materials and components (CRMC) worsened steadily through the 1980s from a relatively small de® cit of £40 million in 1980 to a peak of £2.8 billion in 1989 (Fig. 1). The subsequent improvement in the trade balance through to 1993 can be attributed largely to the impact of the recession in the UK. The trade de® cit in UK construction materials and manufactured components accounts for approximately 15% of the UK’s total visible trade de® cit. Economic policies, intended to foster domestic growth may be undermined by these de® cits.  Since 1990, the UK has lost many manufacturers and suppliers of materials. Many have gone into liquidation, some will start up again, but many have disappeared altogether. Around 105 000 jobs have been lost in these industries since the beginning of the 1980s (Flanagan et al., 1995).Table 1	Estimated percentages of value of various project types accounted for by main inputs (Hillebrandt, 1988)Project typeOperativeMaterialsPlantOther manpower (%)(%)(%)(%)New housing3043225New other building2842426New civil work15352228Repair and maintenance4630222All work3537524  Although it has been assumed that the recent fall in import penetration in construction materials and components has been due to the recession, this has not been proved. Econometric analysis was used to see if there was a statistically signi® cant relationship between the state of the economy and the trade de® cit in construction materials and components (Flanagan et al., 1995). This was done by modelling the time series trade de® cit data and testing to see if speci® c changes in the state of the UK economy were re¯ ected in structural breaks in the trade de® cit and in the import series. Results indicate that the recent improvement in the trade balance in construction related materials and components has been due to a reduction in imports rather than improvement in industrial performance, and suggests that any upturn in theFigure 2	Low value UK imports of ceramic sanitary ware1980± 1993economy in the mid and late 1990s will be associated with rising import penetration in these industries. Very simply, the structural problems that characterized poor trade performance in the 1980s remain and will continue to affect UK trade performance in these industries.  There are many reasons for the UK’s lack of competitiveness: dumping of subsidized products by foreign manufacturers often is put forward as one reason, and also cheap imports from low wage economies. The reasons are complex and different for each sector of the market. Although imports have grown, the slow growth in exports is of equal concern. Figure 2, for example, shows that ceramic sanitary ware from Egypt, Thailand and Turkey has increased in value from zero in 1980 to 7 million ECU in 1993.  Import penetration is high in other sectors because industry is larger in other countries, bene® ting from economies of scale and a greater variety of products and designs, such as glazed tiles from Italy. Italy produces around 45% of all tiles in Europe but uses only about 10± 15% in their domestic market, exporting the rest.  A study undertaken by Edinburgh University showed that Italy’s main export market for tiles is Germany, accounting for 19% of all Italian exports of glazed tiles (Flanagan et al., 1995). The German market is large and prices are high. By using the manufacturing plant ef® ciently for 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, economies of scale are achieved and unit costs are low. In the UK, 31% of glazed tiles and 60% of unglazed tiles come from Italy.  Clearly there are many diverse reasons for rising import penetration and for poor export performance by some British construction related materials and component sectors. Several features of the materials and components distribution system adversely affect UK manufacturers’ competitiveness.  By carrying stock and giving credit, the distribution chain traditionally has sheltered British manufacturers from short term ¯ uctuations in demand and trade debts. Indeed, builders merchants (whose annual turnover is in excess of £6 billion of which some 20% is taken in cash and who give credit) are commonly described as the industry’s bankers. This arrangement does mean, however, that British manufacturers have not developed systems that allow them to respond rapidly to changes in demand. Furthermore, some traditionally are isolated from the end user.  The manufacturer therefore tends to be out of touch with customers’ needs and is reliant on feedback about market trends which reaches him after having passed through two, three or four levels in the distribution chain. A further factor is the role that builders merchants and Do-It-Yourself (DIY) stores play in the supply process and their in¯ uence on the CRMC industries. The merchanting industry currently is experiencing considerable change. The major builders merchants are becoming larger by acquisition and merger; the smaller merchants are seeking niche areas, and the medium-size ® rms are under serious threat from acquisition. Factoring now is growing, with smaller companies sourcing materials from the cheapest source.  The large merchants have to respond by sourcing goods from the lowest cost base, irrespective of where the goods come from. As an example, in recent years the DIY stores have captured almost half of the ceramic sanitary ware market from the builders merchants.Pro® le of the merchanting sectorThe distribution of a large variety of building materials is complex, and a network of builders merchants has evolved. Builders merchants sales in 1994 were estimated at £6 billion through over 2000 outlets around the UK by the Builders Merchants Federation (Keynote, 1995). This excludes sales from the many DIY outlets.  Traditionally, building products and components sold by merchants are divided into two very broad categories which are referred to as heavy-side and lightside: heavy-side includes basic materials commonly used for the construction of buildings of traditional styles, like sand, gravel, cement, bricks and blocks, timber, roo® ng tiles and other similar products; and light-side materials include ® xtures and ® ttings and decorating products.  The range of building products and components has grown substantially in recent years. This has led to a growth in the number of outlets selling speci® c products, e.g. ironmongers, plumbing merchants, etc., and at the same time the development of large stores stocking a diverse range of building materials.Table 2	Number of builders’ merchants in the UK classi® ed by turnoveraTurnover range (£000)199019911992199319941± 4942238257050241850± 99449417368402391100± 249775846803786774250± 499788735711767744500± 9998458307758187881000± 4999 1158108610749928885000+	335328269255219Total	47724624457045224222aFirms with a turnover of less than £22 000 and £24 000 are excluded from 1990 and 1991 ® gures, respectively. Source: Business Monitor PA 1003.Industry structureTable 3 lists selected companies based on turnover, pro® tability and principal activity. There is a small number of very large ® rms that dominate the merchanting sector, but the total number of merchanting ® rms has fallen over the last two years. In 1992, there were 4570 builders merchants registered with the Builders Merchants Federation, falling to 4222 in 1994.  Among the large ® rms in the same period, the fall was from 269 to 219. The 18.6% decline was to a large extent due to consolidation in the industry in the post-boom period. Having become conglomerates with an annual turnover of around £500 million, the larger merchants are now as powerful as many contracting ® rms.  Consolidation in the merchanting sector has led to an increase in market concentration, i.e. a greater concentration of building material sales in the hands of relatively few suppliers. A concentration ratio can be used to illustrate this trend. Table 4 shows a 30% increase in the concentration ratio between 1990 and 1995. Because larger merchants have more buying power they are in a stronger bargaining position with the materials manufacturers, and also effectively more ef® cient in their distribution lines.Market trendsThe fortunes of the builders merchants are inextricably linked to those of the construction industry, in spite of their mixed customer base. Consequently, they suffer from the same boom and bust business cycles. Construction industry output peaked at £55.3 billion in 1990 and fell to £46.3 billion in 1993 (at constant 1990 prices). Construction industry output increased in 1994 to £49.4 billion.  Table 5 shows the output of construction and the calculated value of the sales of a number of basic building materials, namely sand and gravel, cement, bricks, blocks, roo® ng tiles, timber, glass and reinforcement steel bars. This is an arbitrary grouping, but it includes all the materials necessary to build a traditional dwelling, or commercial or industrial premises. The sales of the materials mentioned above peaked in 1990, at the same time as the output of the construction industry. After 1990, both went into decline. During 1994, there was a recovery, and sales of materials increased by 6.6 per cent.  According to the index, the prices of `all materials’ increased by 13.4% between 1990 and 1994. As the demand for materials declined with the falling construction orders, manufacturing plants were put out of commission and, generally, for the 3 years to 1993, production and deliveries declined but prices increased. If in the future the demand for those building materials increases, there is little doubt that the prices will continue to increase and there is a likelihood of further importation.Customer baseThe construction industry is made up of a large number of units of various sizes and of different skills. The very large construction ® rms have material producing subsidiaries and, on account of their purchasing power, they are able to deal directly with manufacturers, factors and wholesalers, thus by-passing the builders merchants. The largest customers from the construction industry are to be found among the medium to small ® rms and independent craftsmen.Role of builders merchants in the supply processMaterials and component manufacturers have three ways of selling their goods: ® rst, direct to the customer; second, through a specialist stockist dealing only with one range of goods; and third, through a builders merchant where the merchant plays only an administrative role. This includes the processing of the contractor’s order and arranging payment to the manufacturer. The goods are delivered ex-works to site. A more traditional role is where the merchant buys in and sells from his own inventory of stock.  One of the major functions of a merchant is to act as a channel for credit to the construction industry. Such credit is a vital source of working capital for most contractors. In 1995, merchanting companies had a combined turnover of £6 billion; £1 billion of which was outstanding credit at any given time (Builders Merchants Federation estimate). A two month credit period is not uncommon, except in the case of the  
  
Table 4	Market concentration of the UK merchanting sectorYearTotal Combined Concentrationindustry turnoverratioturnoverof three (%)(£bn)largestmerchants (£bn)19906.52.64019957.53.853smaller regional merchants who are able to offer only shorter-term credit facilities.  Large merchants are able to offer contractors discounts for large quantities. In some cases, large contractors are able to negotiate prices below the usual discount. Recent press reports suggest that this is a growing trend. Driven by the gradual consolidation in the merchanting sector, housebuilders and contractors increasingly are demanding discounts and negotiating contracts with a single merchant to supply materials on all their sites nation-wide.  Specialist factoring organizations have emerged in recent times. These act as wholesalers to merchants, particularly smaller merchants, and the DIY retailers. Factors are more active in manufactured products where there is a greater variety of products available. This has created the need for buying in bulk. In some cases, merchanting ® rms have set up factoring organizations themselves.  Merchants are facing increasing competition, both from manufacturers and DIY outlets. The clients of builders merchants are mainly medium-size sole independent tradesmen. Large construction ® rms have their own material producing subsidiaries. TheirTable 5	Output of the construction industry in the UK and sales of some basic building materials at current prices(£ bn), 1990± 199419901991199219931994Construction output	55.30851.11547.47346.32349.350Sales of materials	8.2967.6677.1216.9487.405% change year-on-year	--7.6-7.1-2.46.6Materials price index	100103.9104.7108.1113.4% change year-on-year	-3.90.83.24.9Source: Housing and construction industry statistics/ Monthly statistics of building materials and components.purchasing power also allows them to buy materials direct from, mainly, overseas manufacturers. Increasing amounts of building products are sold direct to the retailer or the consumer. These are normally products for the DIY market.  The role of the UK builders’ merchant contrasts with that found on the near continent. The Danish and Swedish systems, for example, stress the need to get merchants involved in the decision-making process at an early stage (Bertelsen, 1995). In particular, representatives of building materials suppliers are involved actively in the design process. This approach has led to substantial productivity gains, particularly on social housing projects. Construction times have been reduced by up to 10%, in some cases, together with a dramatic decline in the number of reported errors. However, this practice can lead to a number of con¯ icts of interest. For example, when the design team and materials supplier co-operate at the early stages of the design process, a purchasing agreement cannot be written, because contracts require de® nite terms about what the supplier will deliver. There are no certainties at this stage, only an agreement on the objectives. Suppliers involved in the early stages of design must therefore work on the basis of trust that they will secure the order, or if more than one is involved in the scheme design, that each ® rm will get its fair share.Competition on priceThe customers of UK builders merchants show little concern for quality or ® tness for purpose, and this is the principal reason why merchanting ® rms compete mainly on price. In a recent national survey of construction professionals on the way in which they speci® ed building materials, 14% of the respondents said that they were more likely to choose on price alone, although 8% said they were less likely to do so: building surveyors and local authority architects were found to be more cost-conscious than the other professionals (Mirza, 1995).  It is no surprise that merchants’ buyers are preoccupied with negotiating lowest possible price. Value for money or cost in use have been given little consideration. The complex distribution chains and the absence of any legislative requirements for products to comply with standards, or for packaging to contain information on standards, performance, or even country of origin, frequently result in distributors knowing almost nothing about the products they buy or sell. Both the customer and the manufacturer are therefore in a very weak position from the point of view of securing value for money. Standards tend to be driven down with price, and the only barrier appears to be public safety.Reducing construction costs ± a new role for builders merchantsSeveral recent studies have identi® ed effective supply chain management as the key to reducing costs in construction (e.g. Atkin et al., 1995). What is more signi® cant, however, is that none of the studies de® ned what supply chain management is within the construction process, nor proposed how it could be improved.  A supply chain is de® ned as `the network of organizations that are involved, through upstream and downstream linkages, in the different processes and activities that produce value in the form of products and services in the hands of the ultimate consumer’ (Christopher, 1992). Thus, the scope of supply chain management covers the ¯ ow of goods from supplier through manufacturing and distribution chains to the end user (Fig. 3). A manufacturer of wooden sheds, for example, is part of a supply chain that extends upwards through the timber stockist to the logging company and downstream through the retailer to the ® nal consumer. Each of the organizations in the chain is dependent upon the others by de® nition and yet, paradoxically, by tradition they do not co-operate closely with one another.  Manufacturing supply chains have, for example, enabled the industry to become more ef® cient and establish many long-term relationships, thus ensuring continuity of work and improved quality of the ® nished product. Demand in construction is less predictable and often sustained over a relatively short period of time; consequently, supply chains in manufacturing are signi® cantly different from those usually adopted for construction. This is compounded by the complex nature of the distribution network for building materials and components.  The construction industry is extremely competitive. Just-in-time (JIT) building materials management, together with good management practices, has the potential to ensure that contractors are competitive in a tough market. In particular, cost savings for a contractor could lead to more competitive pricing for the client. JIT implementation for building materials management requires trust and discipline on the part of the contractor and its suppliers. This requires the contractor to rede® ne the relationships with its suppliers, e.g. by developing long-term relationships and being prepared to exchange information with them.  The traditional builders merchant is still working on obsolete trading practices, and is open to ® erce competition from ® rms applying more modern concepts of materials merchanting. For the merchants to embrace JIT philosophy, they must reorientate their operations. Hale and Karney (1987) identi® ed the service and delivery factors as the most important JIT ingredients for every supplier to have. However, JIT is a method more suitable for a high-volume repetitive productive environment and there are key aspects of JIT which work best in such a situation: (a) material suppliers will need to make very frequent deliveries of small amounts; and (b) a JIT contractor will want to have absolute con® dence in the quality standards of his suppliers. Depending on the distance between the suppliers and the sites concerned, the JIT characteristics in respect of condition (a) might increase the physical distribution costs signi® cantly. Competition on price appears to be a major obstacle to the achievement of condition (b).There is no doubt that there are inherent problems with the JIT method. Pheng (1992) has highlighted many of the disadvantages of this approach, and suggested that a major reorganization of the construction industry would be required for the JIT concept to be applied successfully.  However, other material control techniques do exist. One of the most innovative, is the development of logistics models by the Danish Building Research Institute (SBI).The logistics conceptThe concept of logistics was developed initially within the manufacturing industry and now constitutes an important management tool to ensure an overall strategic perspective on the ¯ ow of materials in the production process (Clausen, 1995). For the construction industry, logistics comprise planning, organization, co-ordination and control of the materials ¯ ow from the extraction of raw materials to the incorporation into the ® nished building. Logistics can be viewed from two viewpoints: from a company point of view where the logistic activities are initiated within the individual company, and from a project perspective where the complete logistic activities for a project are the focus. In building logistics, the focal points are the inter-  
Figure 3 The scope of supply chain management (Oliver and Webber, 1982)   
faces between parties, exchange of data and development across organizational boundaries. Industrial logistics are concerned with developing the entire chain from subcontractors via the factory to distribution of ® nished products to clients. During the building production process, the management of the ¯ ow of building materials to site requires skilful design and  
Figure 4 Comparison between traditional and logistics approaches to the procurement processcontrol of data ¯ ows connected with product and production. In a logistics approach the role of data management is crucial, as building design, production and control, prefabrication of components and the site process often are run concurrently. Figure 4 shows a comparison between the traditional and the logistics approaches to the procurement process.Logistics in relation to current practiceThe considerable loss and wastage of materials in the construction industry indicates that logistics can be described typically as ad hoc collaborations, lack of a long-term strategy and lack of an overall perspective. The design is seldom undertaken with logistic activities of the production process in mind. This is not only because the logistics concept in building is under development, but also is caused by the traditional methods of collaboration and the lack of feedback on problems.  The relationship between suppliers and contractors is characterized by the need to secure the lowest price for materials. The focus is on the lowest price, and little consideration is given to the inevitable costs related to materials handling, i.e. logistics costs. Costs, for example, can be incurred by super¯ uous stock on site, by lack of consistency in delivery, by post-delivery service and by amendments to orders. Decisions made by contractors on the choice of suppliers often are made on the basis of partial information. This is because data are scarce and the participants lack methods and tools to make appropriate decisions. Systematic and careful planning of deliveries is undertaken for only a few categories of materials. This is because gathering and exchange of information is inadequate.  For most of the materials purchased, the planning of deliveries is undertaken on an ad hoc basis rather than systematically. This can lead to two types of problem. First, some materials may be purchased just before they are required, resulting in delays, or interruptions to the working schedule. Second, other materials are procured in large quantities without complying with the production needs on site. This can result in a waste of resources during stocking, handling and transporting.Good logistics practiceThere is no single standard solution for good logistics practice that can ensure successful building construction. Further development of building logistics therefore is an on-going process that should be based on a set of principles and working methods to ensure that questions relating to the logistics approach are considered carefully both within the individual ® rm and within the entire construction process. Good logistics practice may be based on the following principles:a logistically base design where decisions are made on the basis of the most advantageous solution; policy to minimize the total building costs which requires a knowledge about the logistical costs of different types of materials, forms of deliveries etc.; planning of production and deliveries should be based on the JIT concept of materials management together with the greater use of pre-assembled components;planning and operations of site activities based on a strategy to ensure that materials and components are handled, transported and stocked as little as possible;active participation of top management in the construction process, particularly in decisions relating to building techniques and production technology; andintroduction of new ways of collaboration based on a holistic viewpoint, long-term development, con® dence and dependence between parties.  Evidence from pilot projects undertaken in Denmark have shown that major productivity gains are possible if the building process is planned from a logistics point of view, and by involving suppliers in the management of materials supplies (Bertelsen, 1993, 1994). The speeding up of materials ¯ ows and the development of materials handling and transportation require co-operation between construction companies and materials suppliers. Traditionally, suppliers have been selected on the basis of the lowest price. The result has been a large and continually changing body of suppliers which prevents the establishment of a long-term relationship. The aim of the logistics approach to materials management is to eliminate all unnecessary cost in the supply and delivery chains.Partnering relationshipsOne of the main recommendations of Sir Michael Latham’s Constructing the Team report (Latham, 1994) was the need for a reversal of the adversarial relationships and practices that dominated the industry, together with developing new ways of ensuring that all the participants in construction projects achieve a better understanding of clients’ expectations. It is against this background that there is a small but growing interest in new ways of working, and in particular those that go under the label of partnership relationships, alliances or partnering.  Partnership, which involves builders merchants and construction companies developing a long-term relationship and possibly closer working relationship, may be a key element in reducing national construction costs. However, there are also potential obstacles to its development. As well as perceived legal dif® culties, such as regulations relating to public procurement andEU competitive regulations, the cultural context of the British construction industry also may be a barrier. The traditional emphasis in procurement has been on competitive tendering to secure the lowest bid from materials suppliers.  Partnering, where non-price factors such as assessed capability are also important criteria for selecting suppliers, represents a fundamental break from tradition for both parties.  Closer working relationships between construction companies and builders merchants exist, but they are not widespread. This situation may change in the coming years. Driven by competition amongst themselves, larger merchants may forge closer links with medium-size contracting ® rms. In which case, organizational and management issues will dominate the partnership negotiations. Builders merchants, in particular, need to be aware of the factors behind successful partnership relationships and how to overcome obstacles to their development.Effective partnership relationshipsSeveral recent studies have identi® ed key factors behind effective partnership relationships (e.g. Pakora and Hastings, 1995; Lewis, 1995).Partner choice is criticalIt is vital that there is compatibility between the organizations. Partnering requires speci® c organizational norms that are not present in all ® rms. Similarly in selecting suppliers as partners, the emphasis should be on organizational traits rather than super® cial attributes such as best practice. A high degree of internal trust, robust team processes, substantial delegation and empowerment, and a genuine openness towards outsiders are key requirements of a successful partnership relationship.Contractual frameworkCon¯ icts will arise in the best managed partnerships. Successful partnerships anticipate this and agree in advance paths and procedures they will adopt. By anticipating and planning ahead, partners can avoid costly litigation and the diversion of resources in managing the con¯ ict. An important element is starting from a contractual base which encourages joint problem solving, information sharing and risktaking.  Many of the standard forms of contract used in the construction industry are a by-product of the industry’s own adversarial ways of working and not the creation of the legal profession (Pakora and Hastings, 1995). It does seem important for the industry as a whole to develop more radical forms of contract and for clients in particular to specify their insistence on partnerships ways of working. Partnerships are sustained by mutual need, a common objective seen as important enough to dominate any issue, and a willingness to share the bene® ts of a trusting relationship. It is not always possible to develop contracts that encompass all the partnership activities: there are too many tasks, connections and uncertainties.  The need for mutual trust and collaboration between those involved in a partnership venture is crucial. Pakora and Hastings (1995) suggest that these do not happen by accident. In successful partnership there is respect for partners and a willingness to learn from them, not just a view that they are there to provide skills or expertise not available elsewhere. Personal relationships and shared understanding are an important process usually accomplished through team-startup workshops.Example of inter® rm teamsInland Steel and Edward Gray, an engineering construction company, abandoned the traditional adversarial roles of owners and general contractors to complete the relining of an Inland blast furnace. At the start of the project, Inland and Gray held a two-day, off-site partnering workshop, assisted by a facilitator, to engage in team-building activities. Participants also developed a partnering charter and formal dispute resolution procedure. To complement the teamwork, the ® rms de® ned their relationship as having equal involvement, agreed to share the risks and bene® ts, and use open-book negotiations. Thanks to these efforts, the project was completed three days ahead of the thirtythree-day schedule and under budget by 15% (Lewis, 1995).Awareness of capabilitiesOften organizations are not aware of the many skills and capabilities that lie within them. Pakora and Hastings (1995) refer to this as the `knowledge iceberg.’ Essentially, partnerships are about exchanging knowledge and information in a mutually advantageous way. Unless this knowledge can be assessed easily, problems arise.Joint scopingDifferent interpretations and beliefs about the scope and speci® cation of what is to be done are the root of most con¯ ict and adversarial relationships in any construction project (Pakora and Hastings, 1995), in particular, where one speci® es to the other. In partnerships, the client and the key participants de® ne the scope and speci® cation together. This requires a determination to reach a commonly understood view of what is to be done, and how it is to be undertaken.  For example, in a major North Sea consortium, the partners worked through some very tough negotiations and feasibility work as a pre-project process to de® ne both the speci® cation of the work to be done and the target cost. They then agreed that the core objective was to meet the speci® cation at the reduced cost and they provided the common incentive for all parties that the savings would be shared amongst the partners (Pakora and Hastings, 1995).  Partnership relationships between parties in the construction industry may be useful to promote greater ef® ciency in the handling of materials, but also may encourage a more innovative approach to the production of building materials and components. Team work, however, must be based on collaboration beyond a single project. The traditional tendering procedure may be amended to favour this approach on the basis that bids are accepted from the same team of contractors, consultants and suppliers, such that additional contracts are awarded only if there is a consistent reduction in construction costs from one project to another.ConclusionBuilders merchants are an important link in the supply process. Often they are described as the construction industry’s bankers, providing credit facilities to mainly small contracting ® rms; such credit is a vital source of working capital for most contractors. The trend towards consolidation in the merchanting sector, driven by the need to reduce costs, has meant that the big merchants now account for an increasing share of the market.Construction companies can bene® t from the consolidation taking place in the merchanting sector only if they recognize the importance of long-term relationships and effective supply chain management. The supply chains that exist in today’s construction industry have developed along with the industry. It is only by improving these supply chains that the bene® ts to be derived from the key drivers of change can be realized and industrial competitiveness increased. For example, teamwork and incremental improvement require stability of workforce which is achieved easily through off-site manufacture; materials form the main cost element of most projects and are crucial to any cost reduction exercise; partnering could help improve the supply chains through added stability; integration of design and build processes could be used to increase standardization and, hence, simplify supply chains but it depends heavily on supply lead times.  The role of the builders merchant in the construction process has to be re-de® ned. During the design phase merchants should be established as the party responsible for the ¯ ow of information relating to building materials. The involvement of the materials supplier/wholesaler at an early stage of the decision making process in, for example, Scandinavia has led to signi® cant cost savings and increased productivity. Better co-ordination between all parties in the design process will lead, in turn, closer to an optimum solution.  This is where the merchants role would be crucial. By recommending new and better products to the design team, impractical solutions could be pinpointed at an early stage.  Builders merchants are key players in the construction supply chain. However, it is only by recognizing the importance of long-term relationships and alliances with merchants that construction companies can derive signi® cant bene® ts in terms of increased ef® ciency.  Partnering is a key element in any cost reduction exercise (few suppliers able to work to speci® c targets is the ideal scenario). Once the supply chain has been established, work can start on improvements to decrease lead times and costs and increase reliability and delivery times.ReferencesAtkin, B. Flanagan, R., Marsh, A. and Agapiou, A. (1995) Improving Value for Money in Construction: Guidance for Chartered Surveyors and their Clients. The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, London.Bertelsen, S. (1993) Byggelogistik I ± materialsestyring I byggeprocessen, Bygge-og Boligstyrelsen.Bertelsen, S. (1994) Byggelogistik II ± materialsestyring I byggeprocessen, Bygge-og Boligstyrelsen.Bertelsen, S. (1995) Building logistics: a means for improvement of productivity in the building sector, Nellemann, Nielsen and Rauscenberger A/S, unpublished paper.Christopher, M. (1992) Logistics and Supply Chain Management. Pitman, London.Clausen, L. (1995) Building Logistics. Report No.256, Danish Building Research Institute.Flanagan, R., Norman, G. and Worral, H. (1995) Trade performance of the UK building materials and components industry. Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 2(2), 141± 63.Hale, C.D. and Karney, B. (1987) How to professionally qualify your supplier. Proceedings of the American Production and Inventory Control Society Annual International Conference, St. Louis, p.590. Hillebrandt, P.M. (1988) Analysis of the British Construction Industry. Macmillan, London.Keynote (1995) Builders Merchants: 1995 Market Report, 9th Edn. Keynote, Middlesex.Latham, M. (1994) Constructing the team: Final report. HMSO, London.Lewis, J.D. (1995) The Connected Corporation. The Free Press.Mirza, A. (1995) Making the choice cuts. Building Economist, November, 6± 7.Oliver, R.K. and Webber, M.D. (1982) Outlook. Booz, Allen & Hamilton, Inc.Pakora, J. and Hastings, C. (1995) Building Relationships:Team Working and Alliances in the Construction Industry. Construction Papers No.54, The Chartered Institute of Building.Pheng, L.S. (1992) The Just-in-time Concept to Improving Manufacturing Productivity: Is It Applicable to the Construction Industry? Construction Paper No.8 The Chartered Institute of Building.      352	Agapiou et al.  Builders merchants and the supply chain	353    