The decline of the ‘traditional’ family: work‐life benefits as a means of promoting a diverse workforce in the construction industry of AustraliaHelen Lingard & Valerie FrancisTo cite this article: Helen Lingard & Valerie Francis (2005) The decline of the ‘traditional’ family: work‐life benefits as a means of promoting a diverse workforce in the construction industry of Australia, Construction Management and Economics, 23:10, 1045-1057, DOI:10.1080/01446190500394308To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/01446190500394308Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rcme20
Construction Management and Economics (December 2005) 23, 1045–1057The decline of the ‘traditional’ family: work-life benefits as a means of promoting a diverse workforce in the construction industry of AustraliaHELEN LINGARD1* and VALERIE FRANCIS21School of Construction Management and Property, Queensland University of Technology, Australia2Faculty of Architecture, Building and Planning, The University of Melbourne, AustraliaReceived 13 December 2004; accepted 6 June 2005The ‘traditional’ managerial career model was based upon a clear division of labour. Typically, women stayed at home to raise children and manage household work while men acted as primary breadwinners. In this arrangement, relocation, long and inflexible hours of work and frequent travel were not only possible but were a prerequisite for advancement. However, since the 1950s, dramatic changes to family structures and workforce composition have occurred. In the twenty-first century the majority of women, including those who may be considered in the child-bearing and early child-rearing age group, are in paid employment. There has also been an increase in the number of lone parents in the workforce. There is evidence of a corresponding change in employees’ expectations, with both men and women placing greater value on both work and family involvement. Given these changes, it can no longer be assumed that employees are ‘free’ to devote all their energy to their work. Nor can it be assumed that there is a clear separation between employees’ work and personal lives. The construction industry has a culture of long hours and weekend work, and construction employees struggle to achieve a balance between their work and personal lives. This paper suggests that, in order to attract and retain a talented workforce, construction organizations will increasingly have to cater for the diverse needs of employees with regard to work-life balance. Furthermore, it is likely that employees’ needs will vary according to their gender, age and stage of family development. A ‘one size fits all’ approach to managing work-life balance is unlikely to suffice. This paper presents the results of an empirical investigation of projectbased professional and managerial employees’ preferences for work-life balance initiatives in Australian private and public sector construction organizations. Preferences were found to differ significantly by employee family structure and age. The small number of female respondents did not warrant statistical comparisons by gender. However, the profile of female respondents suggests that women with dependent children are seriously underrepresented in project-based positions within the participating organizations. Finally, the implications for managing a diverse workforce are discussed.Keywords: Work-life benefits, age, gender, family structure, diversityIntroductionChanging family roles and workforce demographicsThe roles and expectations of men and women have changed significantly over the past 60 years. More Australian women than ever before are in the workforce reflecting rising educational levels, changing societal attitudes and declining birth rates. The AustralianBureau of Statistics (ABS) report that women’s overall participation in the paid work force in Australia has risen from 43.7 per cent in 1978 to 55.5 per cent in 2004 (ABS, 2004a). As a consequence of the changing workforce profile, the number of dual-income couples overall has increased. In 57.5 per cent of Australian two-parent families (with children under 15) both parents were in paid employment in 2003 (ABS,2004b).  With the increasing acceptance of gender equity, family is being seen more as a joint responsibility, both*Author for correspondence. E-mail: Helenlingard@hotmail.comfrom a financial and nurturing perspective. There hasConstruction Management and EconomicsISSN 0144-6193 print/ISSN 1466-433X online # 2005 Taylor & Francis http://www.tandf.co.uk/journalsDOI: 10.1080/01446190500394308
been a substantial shift in the expectation of fathers’ involvement in parenting. In an Australian study by Russell et al. (as cited in Russell and Bowman, 2000), 68 per cent of fathers reported they did not spend as much time with their children as they would like, with 57 per cent acknowledging that work-related factors were the major contributors to this problem.  The recent change from institutional aged care to home- and community-based care means that responsibility for caring for elderly relatives now rests more heavily with family members. With Australia’s ageing population and increasing life expectancy, the number of workers with filial responsibilities is likely to rise. In 1998 older persons (aged 65 years or more) comprised 12 per cent of the Australian population and are projected to form 24 per cent of the total population by 2051 (ABS, 1999a; ABS, 1998). In fact it was predicted that, between 1996 and 2041, the aged dependency ratio will double from 18.1 to 34.8; thus, for every 100 workers there will be 34 aged dependents (Gorey et al., 1992).  The changing workforce has forced changes to work practices to accommodate those with family responsibilities, most notably for taking time off work. The Australian Bureau of Statistics reported that, during 1998, 58 per cent of Australians with dependent care responsibilities took time off to meet family responsibilities. The average duration of this absence was 9.4 days in a 12-month period (Glezer and Wolcott, 2000). Furthermore, it appears that both men and women take time off work on an almost equal basis for this purpose (ABS, 1999b).Changing expectations regarding work-life balanceChanging family structures have led to changed expectations regarding work-life balance. For example, a survey of Australian men under 35 years of age with young children and partners in the workforce reported that they were feeling more stress and are keen to change the corporate world to enable them to better balance work-life issues (Russell and Bowman, 2000). These findings are consistent with those of Loughlin and Barling (2001), who report that the new generation of younger workers, both male and female, is not motivated by the same rewards as their parents’ generation. Instead they place greater value on ‘nonstandard’ work models that enable them to enjoy a more satisfactory work-life balance.  Becker and Moen (1999) describe how dual-earner couples make a conscious decision to ‘scale back’ work commitments to balance work and family. This scaling back is related to the life-course with many workers, both male and female, consciously placing limits on work commitments following the birth of a child. In Australia, there is also a growing trend for men to reduce their time commitments to work in order to take more responsibility in the home (The Age, 2003). Further it appears that highly educated and professional employees proactively plan to blend work and family and that this influences their employment choices. For example, Cinamon and Rich (2002) report that employees who place high importance on both work and family will seek a work environment in which substantial resources are invested in supporting work-family role combinations (e.g. by adopting worklife balance policies). Similarly, Konrad (2003) reports that professionals and managers who expect to bear considerable domestic responsibilities express a preference for jobs that offer shorter, flexible work hours and a less demanding work environment. While this held true for both male and female respondents, the effect was greater among women, who traditionally invest more hours in household labour than men. However, Konrad (2003) also reports that employees who preferred flexibility to accommodate family circumstances did not reduce their desire for a rewarding career and intrinsically rewarding work. Thus organizations wishing to attract employees with family responsibilities face the challenge of finding ways to provide flexibility without denying career rewards to employees. In this context, non-traditional management approaches are required to attract, retain and motivate employees.The Australian construction industryThe Australian construction industry is characterized by traditional work patterns. There is a strong culture of long hours and weekend work, especially among sitebased employees. During peak times site-based employees are often required to perform significant amounts of unpaid overtime, often with little warning. Unsurprisingly, site-based employees are reported to suffer from significantly higher levels of work-to-family conflict and emotional exhaustion (burnout) than office-based counterparts in the construction industry (Lingard and Francis, 2004). The traditional work patterns prevalent in the construction industry are based on gendered assumptions about the nature of work and the ever-availability of employees. Work cultures that equate long hours spent at work with employee commitment assume a division of labour in which men’s time is devoted to work while women’s time is devoted to managing the home and family, a division which frees male employees to be available to respond to organizational demands at all times (Lawrence and Corwin, 2003). However, the persistence of traditional work patterns in the construction industry, discussed above, is at odds with the enormous social changes that have occurred since the 1950s, most notably the decline of the traditional family, the dramatic changes to the demographic profile of the workforce and the emergence of a new generation of employees with expectations of achieving a satisfactory balance between work and family, as discussed above.  It has been argued that the industry’s failure to accommodate the family needs of employees has acted as a barrier to women’s entry into the construction industry (Fielden et al., 2000). While Australian women’s participation rates in construction and engineering have risen, currently only 7.9 per cent of all managers and professionals in the industry are female (ABS, 2003). The need to diversify the Australian construction workforce has been acknowledged and many direct forms of discrimination have been eradicated, but the industry remains heavily maledominated. Adherence to inflexible, traditional employment practices is likely to be one reason for this failure (Fielden et al., 2000). It is probable that these traditional work patterns act as an indirect form of discrimination for workers with family responsibilities. A recent survey by the Association of Professional Engineers, Scientists and Managers (APESMA) supports this contention. The survey revealed that only 24 per cent of female engineers and 21 per cent of female architects were mothers. Women in these professions were also less likely to work part time and worked more hours a week above the 38-hour standard than other professionals. According to APESMA, many female professionals in engineering and architecture are forced to choose between career and family, with many leaving their professions in order to bear children (The Age, 2004). Other potential employees, both male and female, who foresee family responsibilities in the future may choose alternative careers to those in the construction industry. We suggest that if the construction industry is to attract and retain a diverse workforce, construction organizations must accommodate the work-life balance expectations of both women and men.Work-life benefitsWork-life benefits are formal organizational initiatives designed to prevent or reduce conflict between employees’ work and personal lives. Secret (2000) classifies work-life benefits into four categories:N Alternative work arrangements;N Leave time policies;N Childcare services; andN Mental health and wellness services.  Alternative work arrangements include the modification of daily start and stop times, compressed work weeks, part-time work, job-sharing and tele-commuting on a regular basis. Leave time policies include mandated maternity and paternity leave entitlements and informal arrangements for a few hours or days off with or without pay but available on an ad hoc basis. Childcare services include on-site childcare facilities, subsidization of childcare costs, pre-tax credits for childcare assistance or information referral services for dependant care and resources. Mental health and wellness services include employee assistance programmes (EAPs), stress management workshops and seminars on family-related matters.  Research indicates that the availability of work-life benefits does alleviate the conflict employees experience between work and personal life (Warren and Johnson, 1995; VanRijswick et al., 2004) and facilitates a better balance between employees’ work and personal lives (Tausig and Fenwick 2001; Madsen 2003). Worklife benefits are also reported to improve organizations’ competitiveness by increasing their ability to attract employees (Casper and Buffardi, 2004), inducing employees to exercise discretionary effort in performing their work (Konrad and Mangel, 2000) and helping employees to be more productive (Eaton, 2003). Further, Arthur (2003) reports a positive relationship between the announcement of organizational worklife benefit initiatives and shareholder returns, indicating that investors view family-friendly firms more favourably.  However, there is a lack of consensus about whether the positive effect of work-life benefits is universal (i.e. experienced by all employees, irrespective of their individual characteristics or circumstances) or whether the effect of work-life benefits differs for particular subpopulations of employees. Some research suggests demographic differences exist. For example, McKeen and Burke (1994) explored the extent to which managerial women valued different types of work-life benefits and found significant differences according to age and parental status. Blair-Loy and Wharton (2002) report that, in a homogeneous sample of managers and professionals, the work-life benefits of family-care and flexibility were used by employees possessing different demographic characteristics. Konrad and Mangel (2000) argue that the productivity impact of work-life benefits will be contingent upon the types of workers employed by a firm.  Other research suggests that work-life benefits have a positive effect upon employee attitudes irrespective of whether employees are likely to use them or not. For example, Grover and Crooker (1995) directly assessed the impact of childcare and flexibility policies on the organizational commitment of parents and non-parents. They report that employees who had access to flexible work hours had greater affective commitment, irrespective of whether they were parents or non-parents. However, a policy of providing assistance with the costs of childcare was not associated with higher commitment among either group. Similarly, Casper and Buffardi (2004) report that the work-life benefits of flexibility and dependant care assistance predicted job pursuit intentions irrespective of whether potential employees were likely to use these benefits.  Still other research indicates that the relationship between work-life balance benefits and employees’ work-related attitudes differs according to both employee characteristics and the type of work-life benefit in question. For example, Roehling et al. (2001) explored the effect of gender, age and stage of family development upon the extent to which work-life balance benefits contribute to employee loyalty to their organization. They report flexible time policies are associated with increased loyalty for men and women at all life stages but that the impact of childcare policies on employees’ loyalty varied by employees’ gender and age of youngest child.Research objectivesDespite the potential advantages to be gained from the implementation of work-life benefits, some benefits may be costly to implement. It is therefore imperative that organizations consider the likely outcomes before deciding to provide work-life benefits. Knowledge about employees’ preferences for work-life benefits can assist employers and human resource managers to develop policies and practices that are perceived to be of benefit to important sub-populations of existing or potential employees.  The objective of this study was to identify the preferences of a sample of Australian technical, managerial and professional construction employees, for a range of different work-life benefits. We also tested for significant differences between the preferences of key groups of employees who differ by various demographic characteristics. The rationale for considering these characteristics is briefly presented below.Relevant employee characteristicsFamily development theory holds that people’s norms and expectations change as they progress through the stages of family life. White (1999) suggests that stages of family life interact with stages of other social institutions, including work, in complex ways. He suggests that family life must be synchronized with educational and work careers and that a lack of synchronicity gives rise to strain and conflict. Empirical research indicates that the importance attached to one’s social roles (e.g. as employee or parent) has been found to affect the nature of the relationship between work-family conflict and outcome variables such as job satisfaction and psychological well-being (Noor, 2004). Roehling et al. (2001) suggest that life stage is a function of both biological age and family configuration. It is likely that life stage will have a significant impact upon employees’ experiences at the work-family interface. In particular, entering a partnership (or marriage) and becoming a parent are likely to be two transitions that can affect one’s obligations to family and work and shape the prominence of a person’s role as worker and family member. For example, Abroms and Goldscheider (2002) report that the relationship status of women (e.g. whether they are single, in a de facto relationship or married) has an impact upon the number of hours they spend in paid work. Costigan et al. (2003) suggest that the birth of a child is an important transitional period, significantly increasing family workload and requiring couples to make significant adjustments to family role arrangements. The stressful impact of the transition to parenthood is likely to be increased for employees in dual-earner couples in which both partners need to balance the demands of work with the new roles and responsibilities of being a parent.  Employees’ sex is also likely to impact upon preferences for and use of work-life benefits. It is well documented that working women are more influenced by experiences in non-work domains than men. Hothschild (1989) writes of working women performing a ‘second shift’ when they return home from paid work. Empirical research shows that, on average, women demonstrate a slightly higher use of work-life balance benefits than men (Thompson et al., 1999; Allen, 2001). This may be because, in most Western industrialized societies, women still perform the largest share of care-giving and household tasks (Dikkers et al., 2004).  Given these differences, the extent to which employees respond favourably to organizational work-life benefits could depend, to some degree, on their sex, age and family circumstances. Consequently, Bardoel et al. (1999) suggest that, if work-life benefits are to be effectively used to attract and retain a diverse workforce, these benefits must be strategically designed to meet the needs of key constituent employee groups.Research methodsSurvey administrationThe data were collected from employees of one public and one private sector organization in Queensland, Australia. The public sector organization is involved in the construction of large infrastructure projects and the private sector construction company is involved in both civil engineering and building projects throughout the state of Queensland. All project-based professional or managerial staff of both organizations were invited to participate in the study.  The majority of the data was collected via a World Wide Web-based survey. Paper-based surveys were made available on the website (downloadable pdf version) to allow respondents who were not comfortable completing the survey online to participate in the study. The website contained information about the study as well as privacy information. The web-based delivery of the survey was deemed appropriate for the managerial/professional employees in the sample (Dillman, 2000).  A letter from senior management explaining the purpose of the survey and assuring the confidentiality and anonymity of responses invited professional and managerial employees to complete the questionnaire.The questionnaire designDemographic information collected from respondents included:N year of birth; N age;N gender;N number of years worked in the construction industry;N number of years worked for current employer;N job position;N location of the majority of work time; andN description of family and household, including dependent children (those under the age of 18 years).The utility of work-life benefits was assessed using a 21item composite scale. Participants were asked to indicate their preferences for benefits, ignoring the likelihood of future usage. Responses were scored on a five-point Likert-style scale, where 15not at all useful; 25of limited use; 35moderately useful; 45useful; and 55very useful. The work-life benefit items were drawn from a wide variety of sources (Biggs, 1998; Scheibl and Dex, 1998; Moen et al., 1999; Grandey, 2001; Hill et al., 2001; Saltzstein et al., 2001; Thornwaite, 2002).Data analysisScores for the composite work-life benefit scale were analysed using Principal Components Analysis with varimax rotation. Owing to the clarity of the factors, items loading on these factors were grouped and mean scores calculated for each factor. These mean scores were then used in further analyses of employees’ preferences for work-life balance initiatives. One-way analyses of variance (ANOVAs) were conducted to compare the mean scores for the benefit factors between employees who differed by age and family structure.ResultsTwo hundred and two complete and useable questionnaires were returned. Of the total responses, 63 (31.2 per cent) were from the private sector and 139 (68.8 per cent) were from the public sector. This represents a response rate of approximately 60 per cent from the private sector organization and 28 per cent from the public sector organization. Due to the webbased survey administration, precise response rates are unable to be calculated.  Table1 shows the demographic characteristics of the sample. The mean age of the sample was 39.8 years (SD510.7) ranging from 22 to 67 years. The average age of public sector employees was 40.2 years (SD510.8) and private sector employees was 39.0 years (SD510.5). Of the 202 respondents, 178 (88.1 per cent) were male and 24 (11.9 per cent) were female. In both organizations, the age of the female cohort was substantially younger than that of the male cohort. The average age of the male respondents was 41.0 years (SD510.5) and female respondents was31.1 years (SD57.6).Work-life benefit factorsThe principal components analysis yielded a four factor solution, explaining 61 per cent of total variance. Table2 shows the item loadings for each factor. After careful consideration of the items loading on each factor, the factors were labelled: childcare support; alternative work arrangements; crisis assistance/support; and wellness and personal development. There was relatively little double-loading of items, with the exception of three items. These items related to extended parental leave after the birth or adoption of a child; offering temporary part-time work options during family crises; and providing more flexible work hours. Despite this double-loading, the alpha coefficients for childcare support, alternative work arrangements, crisis assistance/support and wellness and personal development were .93, .77, .79 and .87 respectively. These coefficients meet the requirement of being greater than .70 and indicate that the factor sub-scales possess good internal consistency reliability.Table 1	Demographic characteristics of sampleN%N%AgeJob description20–29 years3919.3Site/project engineer3418.830–39 years7235.6Project/construction manager4120.340–49 years4120.3Contract administration157.450–59 years4321.3Foreman/supervisor73.560 years +73.5Support services2512.4Engineering services167.9GenderCorporate management167.9Male17888.1Other63.0Female2411.9Description of householdYears worked in constructionCouple with dependant children8542.11–9 years7436.6Couple with non-dependant children3115.310–19 years5125.2Single parent63.020–29 years4019.8Couple without children3215.830 years 4+3718.3Single person4823.8Hours worked per weekSpouse/Partner0–29 hours42.0Yes15878.230–39 hours2612.9No4321.340–49 hours9245.550–59 hours4421.8Dependent children60 hours +3617.8Yes10350.9No9949.1Work locationOn site94.5Country of birthSite office6632.7Australia16682.2Head or regional office12662.4Other3617.8Overall preference scoresThe sample mean values for each of the work-life benefit factors are shown in Table3. The highest mean preference score was reported for wellness and personal development. (M53.39, SD5.919). The lowest mean preference score was reported for childcare support (M51.95, SD51.116). There was a moderate expression of preference for alternative work arrangements (M52.41, SD51.059) and crisis assistance/support (M52.51, SD5.932).Comparisons by ageFigure1 and Table4 show the mean preference scores for each of the work-life benefit factors by respondents’ age. Employees in the 40–49 year age group expressed the strongest preference for childcare support initiatives. Understandably, employees in the 60+ age cohort expressed the lowest preference for childcare support initiatives. A one-way ANOVA indicated that the differences in mean preference scores for childcare support initiatives between employees in different age cohorts was statistically significant (F53.381, p5.011).  Employees in the 30–39 year age cohort expressed the strongest preference for alternative work arrangements. Employees in the 60+ year age cohort expressed the lowest preference for alternative work arrangements. However, the one-way ANOVA indicated that the differences in mean preference scores for alternative work arrangements between employees in different age cohorts was not statistically significant.  The highest preference for crisis support was among employees in the 50–59 age cohort. Employees in the 60+ age cohort expressed the lowest preference for crisis assistance/support initiatives. A one-way ANOVA indicated that the differences in mean preference scores for crisis assistance/support initiatives between employees in different age cohorts was significant (F52.983, p5.020).  The highest expressed preference for wellness and personal development initiatives was among employees in the 20–29 year age cohort. Preferences for wellness and personal development initiatives were the lowest in employees in the 60+ year age cohort. A one-way ANOVA indicated that the differences in mean preference scores for wellness and personal development initiatives between employees in different age cohorts was statistically significant (F53.136, p5.016).Table 2	Factor analysis for work-life benefitsFactor 1 Childcare supportFactor 2	Factor 3 CrisisAlternative work assistance/arrangemts	supportFactor 4 Wellness and personal developmentProviding child care facilities..893Providing emergency care for a child or other dependants..889Providing assistance with child care costs (i.e. salary sacrificing)..887Providing vacation care for children during school holidays..821Providing an information and referral service to assist with care of dependant children..798Offering extended parental leave after the birth or adoption of a child..557.514Providing scholarships for employees’ children.520Offering permanent part time work options..799Introducing job sharing..745Offering extended part time options for return to work after the birth or adoption of a child.667Increasing flexibility in work location (working from home/telecommuting)..549Providing an information and referral service to assist with care of aged parents..765Providing of a legal information service..644Offering temporary part time work options during family crises..497.630Allowing for special family leave e.g. to care for a sick dependant..615Providing an employee assistance programme for employees with family problems..599Ensuring people take their annual leave regularly..568Providing a fitness programme (e.g. paying for sports club membership)..746Providing a wellness programme..658Reimbursing the costs of courses and further study..646Providing more flexible work hours..463.567Eigenvalues4.83.02.82.2% of variance22.714.213.310.6NB: Boxes denote factors.Comparisons by family structureFigure2andTable5showthemeanpreferencescoresfor each of the work-life benefit factors by respondents’ self-reported family structure. Employees who are partnered with dependent children expressed the strongest preference for childcare support initiatives. Employees who are single or partnered without dependent children expressed the lowest preference for childcare support initiatives. A one-way ANOVA indicated that the difference in mean preference scores for childcare support initiatives between employees in different family structures was highly significant (F525.255, p5.000).  Employees in all family structures indicated that alternative work arrangements would be of some use to them and a one-way analysis of variance confirmed no significant differences exist. Employees who are partnered with dependent children expressed slightly higher preference for crisis assistance/support initiatives. However, the one-way ANOVA revealed no significant differences between the mean preference scores of employees in different family structures for crisis assistance/support initiatives.This shows that men expressed a slightly higher preference for childcare support benefits than women, while women expressed a stronger preference for wellness and personal development initiatives and alternative work arrangements. Owing to the much  Both partnered employees with children and single parents expressed a relatively low preference for wellness and personal development initiatives. Single employees expressed the strongest preference for wellness and personal development initiatives. Employees who are partnered without children also expressed a relatively strong preference for wellness and personal Figure 1 Respondent preferences for work-life benefit by age cohortdevelopment initiatives. However, a one-way ANOVA revealed that the differences between the mean preference scores of employees in different family structures for wellness and personal development initiatives were not statistically significant.Comparisons by genderFigure3 shows the mean preference scores for each of the work-life benefit factors by respondents’ gender. smaller number of female respondents than male respondents, statistical comparisons of means were not warranted.  These results must be considered in the context of dramatic differences in the family structures of the men and women in our sample. Table6 shows that 83 men (46.6 per cent) reported being partnered with dependent children and six men (3.4 per cent) indicated they were single fathers. In contrast, only two women (8.3 per cent) reported being partnered with dependent children and there were no single mothers. Compared with men, a much larger proportion of female respondents reported themselves to be partnered without children or single.
Table 4	Work-life benefit preferences mean scores for different age cohortsMean Value20–29 years30–39 years40–49 years50–59 years60 years +Childcare support1.762.162.221.621.07Alternative work arrangements2.492.512.062.571.83Crisis assistance/support2.442.392.552.822.05Wellness and personal development3.683.493.373.092.82Table 5	Work-life benefit preferences mean score for different family structuresMean ValueCouple dependantchildren   Couple non dependant childrenSingle parentCouple without childrenSingle personChildcare support2.691.311.791.501.33Alternative work arrangements2.452.342.302.432.37Crisis assistance/support2.732.392.142.302.40Wellness and personal development3.343.063.173.543.63
DiscussionWork-life benefit categoriesThe principal components analysis revealed that some of the benefit items included in the survey loaded on more than one factor. While this was not a serious problem because the factors possessed good internal consistency reliability, the double-loading does suggest that some overlap between work-life benefit categories exists. In particular, there appears to be some conceptual link between childcare support, alternative work arrangements and crisis assistance/support. It is possible that these types of work-life benefit are mutually supportive, offering different ways in which employees can simultaneously satisfy their work and personal life expectations. Future research should explore these linkages.Work-life benefit preferencesPrevious research has linked work-life benefits with job pursuit intentions, organizational commitment, employee loyalty and productivity and share price, suggesting that there is a lot to be gained by organizations that implement work-life benefits. However, our results reveal that preferences for worklife benefits vary considerably between different groups of professional and managerial employees in our sample. These results suggest that there is no ‘one size fits all’ solution to work-life balance in the construction industry. No single work-life benefit is likely to meet the needs of all employees. Thus workforce profiling is probably a useful means to identify the most beneficial and highly valued initiatives to implement. It seems probable that a ‘cafeteria style’ range of benefits might need to be offered from which employees can design
Figure 3	Respondent preferences for work-life benefit by genderthe salary and benefit packages that best suit their needs at a particular life stage. The key is likely to be in affording employees a sense of flexibility and control over their work arrangements. Further, our results suggest that, as employees progress through the stages of family life, their requirements may change, and regular review of work-life benefit availability may need to be undertaken.Table 6	Respondents’ family structure by genderMenN%WomenN%Couple with dependant children8346.628.3Couple with non-dependant children2715.2416.7Single parent63.400Couple without children2212.41041.7Single person4022.5833.3  Among respondents to our survey, male respondents expressed a stronger preference for childcare support policies than female respondents. This finding was somewhat unexpected and appears to contrary to the findings of previous research showing that female employees use organizationally provided childcare arrangements more frequently than male employees (Dikkers et al., 2004). One possible reason for this finding is that, unlike other work-life benefits, not all employees would be eligible to use childcare support. Indeed, these benefits are likely to only be of use to employees who are parents of dependent children. Female respondents with dependent children were seriously under-represented among respondents to our survey. The reasons for this are not clear; however, this may indicate that existing work-life benefits are insufficient to attract or retain working mothers, even acting as a subtle source of discrimination. The under-representation of women in general, and particularly mothers, is a serious concern. Future research should explore the role of various work-life benefits in attracting and retaining women in all age groups and stages of family development.  Our survey was limited in that we were only able to ascertain the work-life benefit preferences of existing employees. It is also important for organizations to consider benefits that would appeal to groups of employees they wish to target for recruitment. The expectations of these people may not be the same as those of existing employees, especially in an industry in which considerable segregation by gender still exists. Careful planning of work-life benefits can be used to target employees from currently under-represented demographic groups and is likely to play an important role in the attraction, retention and motivation of a diverse workforce.  Unlike childcare support, wellness and personal development and alternative work arrangements can be used by all employees. Among respondents in our study, these work-life benefit types were favoured similarly by respondents irrespective of age and family structure. This is consistent with research undertaken by Secret (2000), who explored the likelihood that a sample of men and women would use different types of work-life benefits. She reports that employees with children were no more likely to use some work-life benefits than employees without children and concludes that work-life benefits are valued by all employees, including those who are child-free. Similarly, Roehling et al. (2001) report that employees value flexible work arrangements irrespective of gender or life stage. The implication of our finding is that work-life benefits addressing wellness and personal development and alternative work arrangements can be useful to construction industry employers who are concerned about the equitable provision of benefits to employees with and without dependent children.Work-life benefits and strategic human resource managementGiven the labour shortage facing Australia and the increasing scarcity of key personnel in the labour market, the implementation of work-life benefits is likely to become a greater necessity for strategic human resource management. Previous research suggests that organizations that operate in tight labour markets are more likely to adopt work-life benefits as a means of reducing the negative consequences of work-family conflict and attract and retain high quality employees (Poelmans et al., 2003). In the future, construction firms will experience a greater need to attract employees from currently under-represented segments of the population. Work-life benefits that are linked to job pursuit intentions could play a key role in facilitating this attraction (Casper and Buffardi, 2004). Further, we suggest that adopting work-life benefits would also enhance the competitiveness of construction organizations by eliciting high levels of commitment and performance from their existing employees and reducing costly turnover. Institutional theorists assert that, in industries in which the provision of work-life benefits is not already widespread, proactive organizations that offer benefits gain competitive advantage over those that do not offer work-life benefits (Ingram and Simons, 1995). Thus, in the construction industry, progressive familyfriendly firms are likely to be rewarded with increased organizational effectiveness.Organizational issues impeding take-up of benefitsHowever, research also strongly indicates that the mere provision of such benefits is insufficient. There is evidence that, even when provided, work-life benefits are often not utilized by employees. The workplace social context and the perceived appropriateness of utilization are reported to have a significant impact upon the extent to which work-life benefits are used (Blair-Loy and Wharton, 2002; Kirby and Krone, 2002). It is likely that many of the desirable outcomes associated with work-life benefits will not be realized unless employees do not feel free to utilize them. For example, Eaton (2003) reports that work-life benefits are only related to organizational commitment to the extent that these benefits are perceived to be useable.Usability issues apply to all employees, although particular problems are apparent for employees who are male and/or those who perform a managerial role (Barham et al., 2001).  Issues of organizational culture have been identified as critical determinants of work-life benefit utilization. In particular, employees’ perceptions about the career consequences associated with using benefits, normative expectations about appropriate amounts of time spent at work and managerial support for employees’ worklife balance are likely to play a role. Although work-life benefit programmes create new ways of working, organizational cultures may still reward old ways of working with the result that employees who use worklife benefits are negatively affected (Thompson et al., 1999; Wayne and Cordeiro, 2003).  Empirical research demonstrates that perceptions of a supportive work environment are significantly related to employees’ attachment to their organization above and beyond the availability of work-life benefits (Thompson et al., 1999; Allen, 2001). Research also shows that expectations concerning work outcomes predict the use of work-life benefits (Butler et al., 2003). These studies all suggest that to derive maximum benefit from work-life benefits, organizations need to allay employees’ concerns that use of benefits will lead to negative consequences.  Behson (2002) suggests that, in many instances, rather than take advantage of formal organizationally provided work-life benefits, employees cope with worklife balance issues by making informal adjustments to their work arrangements. These adjustments are not proscribed or mandated by the company but are often sanctioned at a local level by the employee’s immediate supervisor or manager. In a direct comparison of formal work-life benefits versus informal support, Behson (in press) reports that informal support predicted the largest portion (95 per cent) of variance in work-tofamily conflict, job satisfaction, turnover intention and absenteeism. Thus the empirical evidence overwhelmingly supports the relative importance of informal work-life supports in addition to the provision of formal work-life benefits. The highly decentralized nature of construction operations creates the possibility that informal policies are experienced differently within a single construction organization. Negative responses from supervisors or managers at a local or project level could even outweigh the positive effects of benefit provision at the organizational level. In this context, it is particularly important that managers and supervisors at all levels support employees’ work-life balance and fully understand the organizational benefits associated with the provision of work-life balance policies and programmes.ConclusionsOur study has demonstrated that distinct subpopulations of employees differ in terms of their preferences for work-life benefits. In particular, employees’ preferences differ according to their age and stage of family development. In the context of changing workforce demographics and employee expectations about work-life balance, construction organizations should consider the implementation of work-life benefits as a strategy to attract, motivate and retain a diverse workforce. Particular attention may need to be paid to policies and benefits attractive to working mothers. It is noteworthy that one Australian contractor recently introduced a policy of offering paid maternity leave, not a legal entitlement in Australia, in an attempt to attract female employees. Our results indicate that no ‘one size fits all’ solution to employees’ work-life balance exists. Rather, to maintain equity, benefits that can be used by men and women in a diverse range of family structures and life stages should be offered.Future researchThe study was limited in that its focus was solely on the preferences of technical, professional and managerial employees in the Australian construction industry. The findings must therefore be understood in the context of the Australian social, legal and economic environment. It is likely that broader social, legal and economic variables will impact upon employees’ work-life balance experiences and expectations and we therefore recommend that future research replicate our study in other countries.  A limitation of this study was that it relied upon respondents’ reports of their preferences for different work-life benefits. No attempt was made to ascertain whether such policies would be used and, if so, what impact the use of work-life benefits would have. Future research needs to evaluate the effect of different types of work-life benefit on sub-populations of employees. For example, what work-life balance policies bring about a reduction in work-family conflict, an increase in employee loyalty or a reduction in absenteeism and/ or turnover? In order to achieve this, experimental research is required. The extent to which the employee characteristics of gender and life stage moderate the relationship between benefit availability and the outcomes listed above should also be investigated. An experiment of this type would provide human resource managers with a better understanding of appropriate and effective management strategies for a diverse workforce.AcknowledgementThe authors would like to thank the Construction Industry Institute (Australia) for generously funding this research.ReferencesAbroms, L.C. and Goldscheider, F.K. (2002) More work for mother: how spouses, cohabiting partners and relatives affect the hours mothers work. Journal of Family and Economics Issues, 23, 147–66.ABS (Australian Bureau of Statistics) (1998) Population Projection, Australia 1997 to 2051, Australia, Cat No3222, Australian Government Printing Service, Canberra.ABS (1999a) Older People, Australia: A Social Report, Cat. No.4109, Australian Government Printing Service, Canberra. ABS (1999b) Balancing Work and Caring Responsibilities, Cat. No.4903.6, Australian Government Printing Service, Canberra.ABS (2003) Labour Force, Cat. No.6203 (February), Australian Government Printing Service, Canberra.ABS (2004a) Labour Force Australia, Spreadsheets, Cat. No.6202.0.55.001 (July), Australian Government Printing Service, Canberra.ABS (2004b) Australian Social Trends, Cat. No.4102, Australian Government Printing Service, Canberra.Allen, T.D. (2001) Family-supportive work environments: The role of organizational perceptions. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 58, 414–35.Arthur, M.M. (2003) Share price reactions to work-family initiatives: An institutional perspective. Academy of Management Journal, 497–505.Bardoel, E.A., Moss, S.A., Smyrnios, K. and Tharenou, P. (1999) Employee characteristics associated with the provision of work-family policies and programs. International Journal of Manpower, 20, 563–76.Barham, L.J., Gottlieb, B.H. and Kelloway, E.K. (2001) Variables affecting managers’ willingness to grant alternative work arrangements. Journal of Social Psychology, 138, 291–302.Becker, P.E. and Moen, P. (1999) Scaling back: dual-earner couples’ work-family strategies. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 61, 995–1007.Behson, S.J. (2002) Coping with family-to-work conflict: The role of informal work accommodations to family. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 7, 324–41.Behson, S.J. (in press) The relative contribution of formal and informal organizational work-family support. Journal of Vocational Behavior.Biggs, S. (1998) Work practices: the reality versus the rhetoric. Changing families, challenging futures, paper presented at the 6th Australian Institute of Family Studies conference, Melbourne, 25–27 November.Blair-Loy, M. and Wharton, A.S. (2002) Employees’ use of work-family policies and the workplace social context. Social Forces, 80, 813–45.Butler, A., Gasser, M. and Smart, L. (2003) A socialcognitive perspective on using family-friendly benefits. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 65, 57–70.Casper, W.J. and Buffardi, L.C. (2004) Work-life benefits and job pursuit intentions: the role of anticipated organizational support. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 65, 391–410. Cinamon, R.G. and Rich, Y. (2000) Profiles of attribution of importance to life roles and their implications for the workfamily conflict. Journal of Counselling Psychology, 49, 212–220.Costigan, C.L., Cox, M.J. and Cauce, A.M. (2003) Workparenting linkages among dual-earner couples at the transition to parenthood. Journal of Family Psychology, 17, 397–408.Dikkers, J., Geurts, S., den Dulk, L., Peper, B. and Kompier, M. (2004) Relations among work-home culture, the utilization of work-home arrangements and work-home interference. International Journal of Stress Management, 11, 323–45.Dillman, D. (2000) Mail and Internet surveys: The Total Design Method, 2nd edn, Wiley, New York.Eaton, S.C. (2003) If you can use them: flexibility policies, organizational commitment and perceived performance. Industrial Relations, 42, 145–67.Fallon, B. and Mallamace, J. (2000) The need for and the availability of family friendly programs does not mean they will be used, personal communication to principal authors.Fielden, S.L., Davidson, M.J., Gale, A.W. and Davey, C.L. (2000) Women in construction: the untapped resource. Construction Management and Economics, 18, 113–21.Glezer, H. and Wolcott, I. (2000) Conflicting commitments: working mothers and fathers in Australia, in Haas, L.L., Hwang, P. and Russell, G. (eds) Organisational Change and Gender Equity: International Perspectives on Fathers and Mothers at the Workplace, Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA Wiley.Gorey, K.M., Rice, R.W. and Brice, G.C. (1992) The prevalence of elder care responsibilities among the work force population. Research on Ageing, 14, 399–418.Grandey, A. (2001) Family-friendly policies: organizational justice perceptions of need-based allocations, in Cropanzano, R. (ed.) Justice in the Workplace: From Theory to Practice, vol.2, Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ, pp. 145–74.Gray, M. and Tudball, J. (2002) Family-friendly Work Policies: Differences Within and Between Workplaces, Research Report No.7, Australian Institute of Family Studies, Melbourne.Grover, S.L. and Crooker, K.L. (1995) Who appreciates family-responsive human resource policies? The impact of family-friendly policies on the organizational attachment of parents and non-parents. Personnel Psychology, 48, 271–88.Hill, E.J., Hawkins, A.J., Ferris, M. and Weitzman, M. (2001) Finding an extra day a week: the positive influence of perceived job flexibility on work and family life balance. Family Relations, 50, 49–58.Hochschild, A.R. (1989) The Second Shift: Working Parents and the Revolution at Home, Viking, New York.Ingram, P. and Simons, T. (1995) Institutional and resource dependence determinants of responsiveness to work-family issues. Academy of Management Journal, 38, 1466–87.Kirby, E.L. and Krone, K.J. (2002) ‘The policy exists but you can’t really use it’: communication and the structuration of work-family policies. Journal of Applied Communication Research, 30, 50–77.Konrad, A.M. and Mangel, R. (2000) The impact of worklife programs on firm productivity. Strategic Management Journal, 21, 1225–37.Konrad, A.M. (2003) Family demands and job attribute preferences: a 4-year longitudinal study of women and men. Sex Roles, 49, 35–46.Lawrence, T.B. and Corwin, V. (2003) Being there: the acceptance and marginalization of part-time professional employees. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 24, 923–43. Lingard, H. and Francis, V. (2004) The work-life experiences of office and site-based employees in the Australian construction industry. Construction Management and Economics, 22, 991–1002.Loughlin, C. and Barling, J. (2001) Young workers’ work values, attitudes and behaviours. Journal of Occupational and Organisational Psychology, 74, 543–58.Madsen, S.R. (2003) The effects of home-based teleworking on work-family conflict. Human Resource Development Quarterly, 35–58.McKeen, C.A. and Burke, R.J. (1994) The woman-friendly organisation: Initiatives valued by managerial women. Employee Counselling Today, 6, 18–25.Moen, P., Harris-Abbott, D., Lee, S. and Roehling, P. (1999) The Cornell Couples and Careers Study, Report, Sloan Centre for the Study of Working Families, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY.Noor, N.M. (2004) Work-family conflict, work- and familyrole salience, and women’s well-being. Journal of Social Psychology, 144, 389–45.Poelmans, S.A.Y., Chinchilla, N. and Cardona, P. (2003) The adoption of family-friendly HRM policies: competing for scarce resources in the labour market. International Journal of Manpower, 24, 128–147.Roehling, P.V., Roehling, M.V. and Moen, P. (2001) The relationship between work-life policies and practices and employee loyalty: a life course perspective. Journal of Family and Economic Issues, 22, 141–70.Russell, G. and Bowman, L. (2000) Work and Family: Current Thinking, Research and Practice, Department of Family and Community Services, Commonwealth of Australia.Saltzstein, A., Ting, Y. and Saltzstein, G. (2001) Work-family balance and job satisfaction: the impact of family-friendly policies on attitudes of federal government employees. Public Administration Review, 61, 452–467.Scheibl, F. and Dex, S. (1998) Should we have more familyfriendly policies? European Management Journal, 16, 586–99.Secret, M. (2000) Identifying the family, job and workplace characteristics of employees who use work-family benefits. Family Relations, 49, 217–25.Tausig, M. and Fenwick, R. (2001) Unbinding time: alternative work schedules and work-life balance. Journal of Family and Economic Issues, 22, 101–19.Thornwaite, L. (2002) Work-family Balance: International Research on Employee Preferences, Working paper 79, from Working Time Today conference, 16 August, 2002, University of Sydney, Sydney.Thompson, C.A., Beauvais, L.L. and Lyness, K.S. (1999) When work-family benefits are not enough: the influence of work-family culture on benefit utilization, organizational attachment and work-family conflict. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 54, 392–415.The Age (2003) Fathers spurn long hours to reclaim family life. The Age, 6 September, Melbourne.The Age (2004) Want children? Then become a pharmacist. The Age, 16 October, Melbourne.Van Rijswsijk, K., Rutte, C.G., Bekker, M.H.J. and Croon, M.A. (2004) The relationship among part-time work, work-family interference and well-being. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 9, 286–95.Warren, J.A. and Johnson, P.J. (1995) The impact of workplace support on work-family role strain. Family Relations, 44, 163–9.Wayne, J.H. and Cordeiro, B.L. (2003) Who is a good organizational citizen? Social perception of male and female employees who use family leave. Sex Roles, 49, 233–46.White, J.M. (1999) Work-family stage and satisfaction with work-family balance. Journal of Comparative Family Studies, 30, 163–75.1046	Lingard and FrancisWork-life balance in Australia’s construction industry	1047