Using Building Information Modelling to achieve Lean principles by improving efficiency of work teamsXun Zhang, Salman Azhar, Abid Nadeem & Malik KhalfanTo cite this article: Xun Zhang, Salman Azhar, Abid Nadeem & Malik Khalfan (2018) Using Building Information Modelling to achieve Lean principles by improving efficiency of work teams, International Journal of Construction Management, 18:4, 293-300, DOI:10.1080/15623599.2017.1382083To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/15623599.2017.1382083Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tjcm20
Using Building Information Modelling to achieve Lean principles by improving efficiency of work teamsXun Zhanga, Salman Azhara, Abid Nadeemb and Malik Khalfanc,daMcWhorter School of Building Science, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, USA; bDepartment of Civil Engineering, Nazarbayev University, Astana,Kazakhstan; cSchool of Property, Construction and Project Management, RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia; dDepartment of CivilInfrastructure and Environmental Engineering, Khalifa University, Abu Dhabi, United Arab EmiratesABSTRACTBoth Building Information Modelling (BIM) and Lean principles have significant impact on efficiency and effectiveness during a project development process within the construction industry. It is widely accepted that BIM can be used as a tool to help reduce project cost; shorten project duration by optimizing the construction sequence; improving the coordination of project teams; providing communication platform for different disciplines; etc. A further exploration can be made to find out whether BIM can be used as a tool to help project teams to achieve the Lean principles. In this research, a hypothesis was developed to validate if BIM can be used as a tool to achieve the principles of Lean construction by improving the construction productivity during a project. Several metrics were investigated to measure the contributions of BIM towards project productivity. By analysing a case study, this paper explores the connection between BIM and Lean principles; the contribution of BIM in the improvement of coordination and collaboration of work teams; enhancement of project quality; and reduction of waste and cost.KEYWORDSBuilding Information Modelling; construction projects; Lean constructionIntroduction	activities (Mincks and Johnston 2010). Poor coordina-tion and collaboration will cause construction errorsOver the past few decades, despite the application of requiring costly and time-consuming re-work. Theseseveral new and advanced technologies to construcerrors are treated as a kind of waste by Lean thinkingtion projects, the efficiency of the industry has practitioners and should be eliminated during projectremained quite low (Koushki et al 2005). The main construction. In order to achieve this objective, Leanreason for this appears to be the inability of new construction techniques require careful coordinationtechnologies to effectively reduce the cost of design and collaboration between the general contractor andand construction while, at the same time, improving subcontractors to ensure that work can be performedthe management of the construction process (Teiwhen the appropriate resources are available on sitecholz 2004). One approach for improving the produc-(Eastman et al 2008). In this case, Building Informationtivity is through the application of Lean constructionModelling (BIM) is a possible tool that could be used tophilosophy (Aziz and Hafez 2013). Lean construction avoid the errors created by poor coordination and col-philosophy refers to the application and adaptation laboration. At the same time, BIM may also help toof the underlying concepts and principles of the achieve the principles of Lean construction as an expan-Toyota Production System (TPS) to construction sion of the capabilities of 3D CAD (Computer-Aidedindustry. Like in the TPS, the focus in Lean construc-Design). The BIM model initially can be used to aid intion is on eliminating waste; cutting costs; improving the description of the design complexity; then used toteam productivity and creating positive project outassist in the description of construction sequence, lead-comes (Sacks et al. 2009a). ing to the reduction of coordination problems duringThe productivity of the US construction industry has construction (Azhar et al 2012).been declining since 1964 (Teicholz 2013). In a project,As a response to the construction problems discussedconstruction productivity could be affected by many difearlier, the main aim of this research was to investigate ifferent factors. One of the most important factors is theBIM can be used as a tool to achieve the principles oflack	of	coordination	of	subcontractors	with	work	Lean	construction	philosophy	by	improving	the© 2017 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
productivity of work teams. The research sought to achieve the following objectives: to review the interactions of BIM and Lean construction philosophy; to investigate the improvement of work team’s productivity in a BIM–Lean project; to find the contribution of BIM in achieving the principles of Lean construction and to explore the functions of BIM in assisting Lean techniques. The scope of this research was limited to the construction companies and BIM–Lean projects in the southeast of the USA. This paper will specifically talk about the contribution of BIM in achieving the principles of Lean construction and the functions of BIM in assisting Lean techniques.The interaction of Lean construction and BIM Lean constructionKoskela et al (2002) described Lean construction as a way to design production systems to minimize waste of materials, time and effort in order to generate the maximum possible amount of value. Earlier, Koskela (1992) listed the following heuristic principles of Lean thinking: (1) reduce the share of non-value adding activities; (2) increase output value through systematic consideration on customer requirements; (3) reduce variability: reduce uncertainty, increase predictability; (4) reduce cycle time; (5) simplify by minimizing the number of steps, parts and linkages; (6) increase output flexibility; (7) increase process transparency; (8) focus control on the complete process; (9) build continuous improvement into the process; (10) balance flow improvement with conversion improvement; (11) benchmarking.  Based on these principles and several case studies, Engineers Australia (2012) listed the recommended practices used for the application of Lean construction methods which includes (1) eliminating waste: (a) waste walks, (b) value stream mapping; (2) target value design;(3) BIM; (4) Last Planner System; (5) pull planning; (6) information centre meetings; (7) five-step plan (5S) and visual management; (8) standardized work; (9) continuous improvement (CI); (10) built in quality and error proofing; (11) Just In Time (JIT); and(12) prefabrication.Building Information ModellingBIM is seen as an emerging approach that will help the construction industry in achieving Lean construction principles by eliminating waste; cutting costs, improving team productivity and creating positive project outcomes (Gerber et al. 2010). The report of McGraw Hill Construction Report (2012) showed the business value of BIM: (1) 52% reduced document errors and omissions; (2) 51% market new business; (3) 48% reduced rework; (4) 46% offer new services; (5) 39% reduced cycle time of specific workflows; and (6) 23% staff recruitment and retention.BIM and Lean interactionSacks et al. (2010a) identified 56 interactions via using a matrix that juxtaposes BIM functionalities with prescriptive Lean construction principles. Oskouie et al. (2012) extended the matrix of the interaction of BIM and Lean construction. They introduced new BIM functionalities added to those identified by Sacks et al. (2010b): (1) support the make ready process; (2) facilitating real-time construction tracking and reporting; and (3) support augmented reality.  Gerber et al. (2010) conducted three case studies from practice through the BIM-based objectives and outcomes. They mapped these outcomes to the taxonomy of the interaction matrix described by Sacks et al. (2010a). They presented the hypothesis that BIM in fact will become increasingly essential and an inextricably linked component to a Lean construction process, especially within the context of abundant geometric and semantic project information. The hypothesis is validated through the project documentation and practise testimonial in the form of time savings, waste reduction and enhanced collaboration. BIM provides a powerful platform for visualizing workflow in control systems that also enable pull flow and deeper collaboration between teams on and off site (Sacks et al. 2010b). Their case study found that BIM and schedule integration are essential to improving upstream flow variability through visualizing construction methods and processes (Sacks et al. 2010a). Interaction; optimization through 4D scheduling for improving efficiency and safety can help identify bottlenecks and improve flow, and interaction; visualization of proposed schedules and visualization of ongoing processes to verify and validate process information (Sacks et al. 2010a). The use of BIM and its synchronization with the scheduling software solutions and experts can help to reduce the waste caused by poor coordination, and maximize value for the entire project constituency by ensuring look-ahead collaboration (Gerber et al. 2010).Tools of BIM and Lean interactionBIM–Lean synergies were identified and set the foundation for the proposal of a team coordination approach combining BIM tools and Lean techniques (Clemente and Cachadinha 2013). Lean construction and BIM are creating a fundamental change in the AEC industry. Although the two concepts are independent and separate, there appear to have synergies between them (Sacks et al. 2009b). These tools take into account the relationships between different processes, as well as the precedent of each and still control the activities carried out and the activities still to be done (Oskouie et al. 2012). Sacks et al. (2010b) proposed the KanBIM concept, whose primary contribution is providing visualization not only for the construction product, but also for the production process. It extends the Last Planner System (LPS)TM by providing the necessary information platform to reduce the resolution of planning coordination from weekly to daily. The evaluation results show that the system holds the potential for improving workflow and reduce waste by providing both process and product visualization at the work face.  A BIM–Lean approach to the management of Mechanical, Plumbing and Electrical (MEP) Systems maintenance works significantly contributes to their efficiency. In a broader sense, MEP and related maintenance works come under the category of construction, since construction activities are not just limited to civil works. Through the utilization of the BIM model it was possible to generate a 3D visual support of the infrastructure and workflow process, allowing the identification of the various restrictions in place, and the detection of potential collisions and conflicts during construction, as prescribed by Lean principles. Using an LPS planning approach and the BIM model simultaneously, it was possible to plan the best work sequence between the various participants, reducing the duration of the activities to about half. In terms of planning, poorly structured activities were modified, and procedures that did not add value and decreased productivity were eliminated. BIM is control, and this is the base for construction industrialization. BIM has proven to be a powerful resource for enabling Lean (Clemente and Cachadinha 2013).  The VisiLean is a production management system that integrates Lean and BIM. It is a research software that aims to integrate the process and product visualization, support the Last Planner process and improve the efficiency of the construction management process. Dave et al. (2013) conduct a case study to implement VisiLean in the installation of traffic control gantries on a major UK motorway. Based on feedback, they found that the VisiLean team would facilitate the look-ahead and weekly planning sessions over the next three months, and get feedback from the project team on its use. However, certain challenges encountered, especially while importing the BIM model meant that the original plan could not be pursued, and the VisiLean system could not be used until these issues were resolved (Dave et al. 2013).Summary of BIM–Lean interactionIn conclusion, construction projects suffer from waste that is manifested in waiting time for crews, rework, unnecessary movement and handling of materials, unused inventories of workspaces and materials (Sacks et al. 2009a). Adopting a methodology based on a BIM–Lean approach will lead workers to manage the everyday processes with greater reliability and less variability, reducing operation downtimes in public facilities of intense use (Clemente and Cachadinha 2013).Case studyThis research aimed if BIM can be used to achieve the principles of Lean construction which in turn improves the productivity in various aspects of the project. The methodology has been to explore the relation of BIM and Lean thinking, the contribution of BIM in achieving Lean principles. Based on the results of existing research, a framework (Figure 1) has been developed to validate the hypothesis that BIM can be used as a tool to achieve Lean principles by developing project productivity.Figure 1. Research framework.  BIM and Lean practice are two different technologies that can be used independently in construction. Existing literature has illustrated some interaction of BIM and Lean construction. They indicate that BIM can be used as a tool to achieve Lean principles and help to implement Lean techniques. The following framework of this research was developed based on the main findings of existing research (Koskela 1992; Sacks et al 2010a):(1) From the literature review, BIM allows project teams to(a)Develop coordination and communication of work teams(b)Avoid clashes and time-consuming re-work(c) Visualize the buildingThe lean principles of Koskela (1992) can be achieved by(a)Reducing cycle time(b)Reducing production variability(c) Reducing construction waste  Some metrics were established to measure the benefits of BIM in achieving Lean principles. These metrics were selected based on the lean principles. (1) Hours of re-work: re-work causes cost overrun and project delay. However, as BIM reduces the amount of hours required for re-work, the product cost, cycle time and duration will all be reduced as well. (2) Physical conflicts: clashes are discovered in the models and corrected before construction begins. Discovering these errors early on allows for a higher level of coordination between different contractors, and significantly reduces conflicts occurring in the field, saving time and money. (3) Request for informations (RFIs): RFIs are used to clarify unresolved issues on a project. The visualization of the project that BIM offers allows the contractor to work with a higher degree of clarity and allows for better coordination and communication between all work teams on a project. In this workflow, the number of RFIs required to finish a project is much lower than normal. (4) Change orders: better coordination and communication of work teams will significantly reduce the amount of change orders needed. (5) Prefabrication: BIM allows a higher use of prefabricated structural elements to provide a more efficient and safer construction phase. (6) Cost saving: this metric compares the estimated cost to actual cost. (7) Schedule compliance: this metric compares the estimated schedule to actual schedule completion.  Then, a case study was conducted to test the metrics established as well as the main contribution of BIM and Lean practices in the improvement of project productivity. The related qualitative and quantitative data were collected by interviews with construction professionals, project documents and observation from a BIM–Lean-based project involved in the case study. After evaluating the results from the case study, research conclusion was provided to validate framework model and the hypothesis.  During the case study, parts of data were collected from a series of interviews. A total number of seven people were interviewed to collect the information of the implementation of BIM and Lean principles in developing project productivity. Interviewees could be divided into three categories in relation to their broader specialties such as BIM, Lean and Contracting. Accordingly, the three categories were (1) BIM manager/coordinator/ consultant, (2) Lean construction manager/specialist/ consultant, and (3) construction managers/general contractors/subcontractors. However, due to a small sample size, no attempt was made to differentiate between the responses of three categories. A list of some of the interview questions that were asked to the relevant professionals is as follows: What is the total cost and duration of the project?; Explain the application scope of BIM for the project; What BIM software was used on the project?; Explain the BIM implementation plan for the project; What are the benefits of BIM experienced on this project?; List any Lean construction principles that were used on the project; List any Lean construction techniques that were used on the project; How did you implement the Lean construction process for the project?; How did you measure the productivity of the project?; How much waste was eliminated by Lean construction techniques and BIM?, etc.  The research data were collected from a construction project that utilized both BIM and Lean techniques. The Martin Army Community Hospital in Fort Benning, Georgia, was used as the case study project in this research. BIM-use contributed greatly to the project’s success, both in time and material cost. The clash detection of BIM avoided re-work, which is an efficient way to eliminate time and waste. Also, BIM made a large contribution in the implementation of prefabrication, which could be seen as a practice of Lean construction. With the use of prefabrication, the project team received a good performance in time reduction and labour safety elimination. Further information on the building can be seen in Table 1.Table 1. Martin Army Community Hospital information.ItemDescriptionProjectMartin Army Community HospitalOwnerUS Army Corps of Engineers (USACE)Project architectEllerbe Becket/RLF Joint Venture (before July 18, 2012); AECOM (after July 18, 2012)General contractorTurner Construction, USLocationFort Benning, Columbus, GATotal contract value$333,359,000Square footage of project facility745,000Delivery systemDesign-BuildLEED certificationSilverProject duration8/2011–7/2014  The following data were collected from the project: the amount and scope of prefabrication; schedule Savings; Cost Saving (direct cost saving and indirect cost saving); the amount of Requests for Information during construction phase; rework during construction; clashes detected by using BIM; the amount of field conflicts and time required to resolve conflict; and change order (numbers and cost information).Results and main findingsThe main part of the case study research was about a hospital located in Georgia, USA. Several Lean practices were applied in this project like JIT delivery, Last Planner System, prefabrication and so on. The main contributions of BIM support team in the application of these practices were to improve the coordination of MEP systems, to allow more prefabrication, to develop construction safety, to reduce inventory, and to avoid construction clashes and time-consuming re-work.The application of lean practices on the case projectJIT delivery is one of the main applications of Lean material management which requires the material be delivered in the right part, at the right time and in the right place. The aim of this application is to minimize the on-site storage area as well as reduce the project inventory cost. In this project, construction teams tried to bring the materials on site when it was ready to be consumed on the project and kept minimum amount of materials on site throughout the duration of the project. In many situations, the teams allowed the storage of materials a maximum one week. In this process, BIM was used as a tool to provide project teams the information of materials. For example, based on the information and construction sequence, project teams looked ahead to identify the exact number of doors and frames which were needed to be installed in a certain construction phase. In this way, they did not need any redundant materials on site, which met the requirement of JIT delivery.  The Last Planner System produces maximized value to the owner by eliminating waste caused by unpredictable work flow which may be caused by bad weather, change orders, etc. In this project, work teams developed a six-month construction sequence and involved each subcontractor to determine which role they would play in the sequence. Then they started working it backwards, to determine the construction sequence from the end to the start. After every three months, the teams repeated this process and planned the next six-month sequence. The traditional scheduling methods separate groups from one another, causing a lack of communication and teamwork. This is one of the main reasons for low work efficiency. Instead, using the Last Planner System, construction groups determined the sequence and shared their responsibilities together. Through the researched project, this system proved to encourage the communication between different work teams. Compared with the conventional way, the Last Planner System made the project sequence more flexible and predictable. As a visual tool, the BIM model was used first by construction groups when they made construction plans. The model provided illustrating support to the system. Every work team highlighted their construction activities with the help of the model. In fact, the BIM model played as a reference in the system.The applications and main contributions of BIMAs one of the main functions of BIM, the MEP system coordination process in this project had a high quality and brought a lot of benefits to construction teams. During the coordination process, the BIM group tried to minimize the clashes in this project. Usually, they coordinated a half of a floor about 15,000–20,000 square feet in one time. They started with several thousand clashes as a total among the systems. After days’ coordination, the clashes came down to few hundreds. There was a remarkable reduction in the construction clashes with the help of Navisworks clash detection. As they continued the coordination, the BIM group became more confident and more comfortable. Trust among the teammates developed, so they did much better at coordinating the things in the tightened time frame. The high degree with confidence allowed the high efficiency and comfort of installation crews. See Figure 2, as an example of BIM coordination and site installation.  In this project, BIM made a significant contribution in the application of prefabrication which is an efficient way to develop the project productivity. This project had two priorities in the electrical part. Priority A was the high bay racks, which was the biggest distribution of racks and most of them were prefabricated. This part was finished in high quality within a relatively short time. Priority B was the low conduit. Less than half of them were prefabricated. Without the help of the BIM model, too much on-site fabrication caused a lot of problems. Another thing that the project teams did to increase the project productivity was setting the hangers for major systems. The project teams used the information provided by BIM to locate the position of hangers. Then, they went out to the field and used Trimble total station devices to lay those points out on the metal deckFigure 2. Examples of BIM coordination and field installation.above. After that, they drilled in and dropped in the blue banger screw posts before the pouring of slabs so that they could just go back with threaded rod. Traditional methods of layout and installation of slab inserts for overhead supports took a three-man crew nine hours on a single bay to complete. But in robotic layout, two men completed the same work in three hours. Thus they had four times increase in productivity by reducing man hours necessary to put in hangers. Besides, in this way, nobody will be standing on the 16 feet up off-ground and using a hammer drill to go into concrete, which is a tremendous development for construction safety.  On-site job box was used in this project. This device was used to distribute the construction documents set. Project manager teams transferred these documents into various files and used the hyperlink set to upload the construction documents to the master folder in the cloud drop-box. Every work team could access to the documents by using the on-site job box on their laptops or iPads. There were two main advantages of the application of on-site job box. (1) This project had about 4000 sheet sets and always needed to be updated. If the project teams printed out all of the sheets, that would increase project cost and paper waste. While by using the job box and BIM model, the project teams updated the information without any paper cost. In this way, BIM helped to reduce the cost of project; (2) the updating speed of an Internet-based information platform is much faster than that of a paper-based information platform. Work teams got the most up-to-date information with the help of BIM.  Based on the collected data, the main findings of the case study were summarized as follows: (1) BIM and Lean practices help to reduce the cycle time of RFIs. In a traditional way, to get the response back of RFIs usually would be taken two weeks. However, the project teams did it in three days with help of the model. Because they showed the problems in an actual area and defined RFIs with much clearer terms the meaning of the questions. They turned around RFIs at 3–4 days with a clear understanding in a minimum time; (2) BIM allowed more prefabrication for Lean practice. The BIM-based MEP coordination process allowed more prefabrication in this project. There were about 50% prefabrication used in priority A of electrical part, 75%–80% prefabrication used in the HVAC system and 40%–50% prefabrication used in the Plumbing system. The robotic layout made the hanger installation speed four times faster than that of a traditional way. In this process, workers did not need to climb up ladders, which made the construction process much safer; (3) BIM reduced construction clashes significantly. The project team has reduced the number of clashes in a half floor area from thousands to few hundreds. This process reduced time-consuming re-work and gave work teams confidence; (4) BIM helped to achieve Lean principles by reducing waste. The job box reduced the hard documents used on site, which saved the project cost and reduced paper waste. Also, the on-site model accelerated the information exchanging speed.ConclusionThis research illustrated the main applications of BIM and Lean practices in an actual project. BIM helped to establish a communication platform for work teams, improved the quality of coordination, developed productivity of work efficiency and made the project safer. It is a known fact that Lean is the process which focuses on maximizing productivity as well as minimizing waste. The research results showed that BIM not only helped in clash detections, but also helped in the development of value adding work-flow through work team coordination and communication. The hypothesis about whether BIM can be used as a tool to achieve the principles of Lean construction by improving the construction productivity of a project was supported by the results of this research. In the case study, the BIM coordination gave work teams a high degree of confidence. As we know, the morale of work teams is a very important impact factor on the project productivity. The further research can focus on (1) the impact of BIM on work teams morale. It can be analysed that BIM can be used to develop construction productivity of workforce; (2) development of the interaction of BIM with Lean techniques. One of the limitations of this study was mapping each metrics with the findings. Since the outcome of this paper was based on the results from one case study, not much emphasize was given on the statistical analysis. The authors have tried to present results in more generic terms to suit the analysis done in this paper. Further research in this area through conducting more case studies could overcome this shortfall.Disclosure statementNo potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.ReferencesAzhar, S, Khalfan, M, Maqsood, T. 2012. Building information modelling (BIM): now and beyond. Constr Econ Build. 12(4):15–28.Aziz R, Hafez M. 2013. Applying lean thinking in construction and performance improvement. Alexandria Eng J. 52(4):679–695.Clemente J, Cachadinha N. 2013. BIM-Lean synergies in the management on MEP works in public facilities of intensive use – a case study. Proceedings for the 21st Annual Conference of the International Group for Lean Construction;July; Fortaleza, Brazil.Dave B, Boddy S, Koskela L. 2013. Challenge and opportunities in implement lean and BIM on an infrastructural project. Proceedings for the 21st Annual Conference of the International Group for Lean Construction; July; Fortaleza, Brazil.Eastman C, Teicholz P, Sacks R, Liston K. 2008. BIM handbook: a guide to building information modeling for owners, managers, designers, engineers, and Contractors. Hoboken (NJ): Wiley.Engineers Australia WA Division. 2012. Recommended practices for the application of lean construction methods to building New Australian LNG capacity. West Perth, WA: Engineers Australia.Gerber, D J, Becerik-Gerber, B, Kunz, A. 2010. Building information modeling and lean construction: technology, methodology and advances from practice. Proceedings of the 18th International Group for Lean Construction conference; July14–16; Haifa, Israel.Koskela L. 1992. Application of the new production philosophy to construction. Stanford (CA): CIFE, Stanford University. Technical Report No. 72.Koskela L, P Huovila, J Leinonen. 2002. Design management in building construction: from theory to practice. J Constr Res. 03(1):1–16.Koushki, P, AlRashid, K, Kartam, N. 2005. Delays and cost increases in the construction of private residential projects in Kuwait. Constr Manag Econ. 23(3):285–294.McGraw Hill Construction Report. 2012. The business value of BIM in North America. [accessed 2017 May 31]. Available from: http://images.autodesk.com/adsk/files/mhc_busi ness_value_of_bim_in_north_america_2007-2012_smr.pdf Mincks, W, Johnston, H. 2010. Construction jobsite management. Boston, MA: Cengage Learning.Oskouie, P, Gerber, D J, Alves, T, Becerik-Gerberer, B. 2012. Extending the interactions of building information modeling and lean construction. Proceedings for the 20th of the International Group for Lean Construction Conference; July; San Diego, CA.Sacks, R, Treckmann, M, Rozenfeld, O. 2009a. Visualization of work flow to support lean construction. J Constr Eng Manag. 135(12):1307–1315.Sacks, R, Rozenfeld, O, Rosenfeld, Y. 2009b. Spatial and temporal exposure to safety hazards in construction. J Constr Eng Manag. 135(8):726–736.Sacks, R, Koskela, L, Dave, BA, Owen, R. 2010a. The interaction of lean and building information modelling in construction. J Constr Eng Manag. 136(9):968–980.Sacks, R, Radosavljevic M, Barak, R. 2010b. Requirements for building information modelling based lean production management systems for construction. Automat Constr. 35 (1):1–17.Teicholz, P. 2004. AEC bytes. Available from: http://www.aec bytes.com/viewpoint/2004/issue_4.htmlTeicholz, P. 2013. BIM for facility managers. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.294		X. ZHANG ET AL.	INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT		295